Source file: Comparative_Review_Study_of_Military_and_Civilian_.pdf
Relative path: Comparative_Review_Study_of_Military_and_Civilian_.pdf
Page count: 16
Extracted pages: 16

================================================================================

[Page 1 / 16 | chars: 2478]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

INCAS BULLETIN, Volume 11, Issue 3/ 2019, pp. 183 – 198         (P) ISSN 2066-8201, (E) ISSN 2247-4528 
 
Comparative Review Study of Military and Civilian 
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) 
Sudhir Kumar CHATURVEDI*,1,a, Raj SEKHAR2,b, Saikat BANERJEE3,c,  
Hutanshu KAMAL4,d 
*Corresponding Author 
*,1Department of Aerospace Engineering, University of Petroleum & Energy Studies,  
Dehradun-248007, India,  
sudhir.chaturvedi@ddn.upes.ac.in 
2Department of Mechanical Engineering, Indian Institute of Science,  
Bengaluru-560012, India,  
raj.sekhar56@gmail.com 
3Wingbotics, Kolkata-700086, West Bengal, India,  
bsaikat226@gmail.com 
4Indian Institute of Management Ranchi,  
Ranchi-834009, India,  
hutanshu.kamal18@iimranchi.ac.in 
DOI: 10.13111/2066-8201.2019.11.3.16 
Received: 26 April 2019/ Accepted: 02 August 2019/ Published: September 2019 
Copyright © 2019. Published by INCAS. This is an “open access” article under the CC BY-NC-ND 
license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/) 
Abstract: Indian flying corps and Israel Aerospace Industries (IAI) forged long standing military ties, 
Israel aviation enterprises keeping up their strong position as best-in-class UAV manufacturers for 
both civilian and military use and supplying the Indian military with advanced UAV frameworks. IAI 
has provided IAF with a sum of 176 Israel-made automatons including 108 IAI Searchers and 68 
unarmed Heron-1 airships for observation and surveillance missions including an armada of IAI 
Harpy rambles. With the expanding request of India's military associations, for example, the DRDO, 
Aeronautical Development Establishment (ADE), the National Aerospace Laboratories (NAL), 
Hindustan Aeronautics Limited (HAL) have been creating UAVs with ISR, focusing on, and weapon 
direction abilities. The first trip of the Rustom-2 model on 16 November 2016 was a turning point for 
India. This work shows the correlation of the Indian and Israeli UAVs created depending on their 
main capacities and execution qualities. 
Key Words: Unmanned Aerial Vehicles, Israel aerospace industries, Nano Air Vehicles 
1. INTRODUCTION 
Unmanned Air Vehicles (UAVs) occupy a dominant place in the peak areas, where emphasis 
is placed on observation, accumulation of knowledge and spread of data. In several decades, 
UAVs have developed from performing a solitary mission to carrying out complex missions, 
 
a Assistant Professor (SG), 
b Research Assistant 
c Director 
d Student

[Page 2 / 16 | chars: 3999]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sudhir Kumar CHATURVEDI, Raj SEKHAR, Saikat BANERJEE, Hutanshu KAMAL 
184 
 
INCAS BULLETIN, Volume 11, Issue 3/ 2019 
such as observing, verifying, insuring, tracking with the use of last-minute innovations. 
UAVs fill in as one of a kind apparatus, which expand front line situational mindfulness and 
the capacity to see, target, and obliterate the adversary by giving noteworthy knowledge to 
the most minimal strategic dimensions. An unmistakable favourable position of UAVs is 
their cost-adequacy. They can be created, delivered, and worked at lower costs contrasted 
with the expense of keeping an eye on airship [3]. The relative funds in motors, airframes, 
fuel utilization, pilot preparing, coordination, and support are tremendous. The most 
favourable position of UAVs, nonetheless, is that there is no hazard to human lives. 
Unmanned segments are increasingly deadly and non-deadly weapons as per the decision 
and have changed how the military at present prosecute responsibilities. The probability of 
trailing perception stages to foe fire is remarkably higher, which explains UAV as a 
significant verdict. Among UAS, promising attributes are long flight span, enhanced mission 
security, flight repeatability because of enhancing autopilots, and lessened operational costs 
when contrasted with keeping an eye on airship [2]. The potential focal points of an 
unmanned stage, be that as it may, rely upon numerous variables, for example, flying 
machine, sensor types, mission destinations, and the current UAS administrative necessities 
for activities of the specific stage. India and Israel being dominant military superpowers have 
joined the utilization of UAS in outskirts watch, observation surveillance and for remote 
detecting as well; the of little and medium-class stages, the last has is a worldwide stalwart in 
UAV innovative work for regular civilian and military tasks. 
This paper (1) to describe different UAV stages and classifications of UAS and  
considerations for their use in remote detecting and military missions. This article various 
stages and classifications of UAS and for their use in remote sensing and military missions; 
(2) to arrange Indian and Israel UAS improvement in the most recent decade dependent on 
their execution qualities (3) to examine case situations in which UAV frameworks have been 
utilized in regular civilian and military tasks. 
2. UAS PLATFORM TYPES AND CHARACTERISTICS 
Unmanned airship frameworks comprise the airship segment, sensor payloads, and a ground 
control station. The last mentioned, operated by at least one individual notwithstanding a 
devoted human “pilot” (enhanced sometimes by an extra "spotter" to guarantee security), 
generally fluctuates in its design contingent upon the stage and mission. Committed control 
frameworks might be dedicated to large UAVs, and mounted on board vehicles or in trailers 
to empower nearness to UAVs constrained by range or correspondence capacities [1]. The 
littlest classes of UAVs regularly are joined by ground-control stations comprising of PCs 
different segments little enough to be conveyed effortlessly with the flying machine in small 
vehicles, onboard watercraft, or in knapsacks. 
2.1 Classification of UAS Platforms 
The arrangement of UAS stages for common logical utilizations has, for the most part, 
pursued existing military description of the stages dependent on attributes, for example, 
measure, flight perseverance, and abilities. The widely recognized terminology in the field of 
non-military personnel is as follows: MAV (Micro (or Miniature) or NAV (Nano) Air 
Vehicles), are purported due to their size, which commonly empowers military variants of 
this airplane to be transported inside individual officers' knapsacks. This airship will operate 
in general works at low elevations (<330 m), with size restrictions on battery limit prompting 
short flight times in the region of ca. 5– 30 min [1]. VTOL (Vertical Take-Off and Landing):

[Page 3 / 16 | chars: 2876]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

185 
Comparative Review Study of Military and Civilian Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) 
 
INCAS BULLETIN, Volume 11, Issue 3/ 2019 
These airships require no departure or landing run, and are hence generally picked in 
circumstances where confinements of the landscape need this particular ability. Airship of 
this sort work at different heights relying upon their central goal profile yet prevalently fly at 
low elevations [1]. High power prerequisites for floating flight limit the flight lengths for 
VTOLs, aside from in the most significant sizes where expanded lifting abilities suit 
extensive fuel limit. LASE (Low Altitude, Short-Endurance): frameworks, otherwise called 
UAS, small unmanned airship frameworks, likewise hinder the requirement for runways with 
flying machine streamlined for simple field organization/recuperation and transport [1]. The 
flying machine part of these frameworks regularly gauges ca. 2– 5 kg, Remote Sens. 2012, 4 
1674 with wingspans <3 m to empower propelling from smaller than usual sling 
frameworks, or by hand. Bargains among weight and capacity will in general decrease 
continuance and correspondence extends to 1– 2 hand inside a couple of km of ground 
stations. 
LALE (Low Altitude, Long Endurance): Typically, at the upper end of the “UAS” weight 
assignment by the United States Federal Aviation Administration [1] (FAA; see underneath), 
these UAS may convey payloads of a few kgs at elevations of a couple of thousand meters 
for expanded periods. MALE (Medium Altitude, Long Endurance): airship is regularly a lot 
bigger than low-elevation classes of UAVs, working at heights up to ca. 9,000 mon flights 
several km from their ground stations enduring numerous hours [1]. 
High Altitude, Long Endurance: These are the biggest and most complex of the UAS, with 
airship bigger than many general-aeronautics kept an eye on flying machine [2]. These 
UAVs may fly at heights of 20,000 m or more on missions that expand a considerable 
number of km. Some HALE airship has flight terms more than 30,000m and has set records 
for height and flight length. For the motivations behind effortlessness, we will depict a few 
qualities of the different size stages for supporting nonmilitary personnel remote detecting 
and logical research applications from some time ago recognized classifications of UAS 
(MAV, LALE, LASE, MALE, HALE, and VTOL) as shown in figure 1. 
 
Figure 1: Classification of Indian UAS based on their endurance and wing span 
2.2 MAV/NAV UAS 
The MAV was initially defined as a UAV having a wing-span no greater than 150 mm[1]. 
They are designed as short mission profile surveillance platforms, allowing unobtrusive 
observation capabilities in confined spaces or hostile environments in military applications. 
The Council of Scientific and Industrial Research (CSIR) – NAL, in particular, has been

[Page 4 / 16 | chars: 2445]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sudhir Kumar CHATURVEDI, Raj SEKHAR, Saikat BANERJEE, Hutanshu KAMAL 
186 
 
INCAS BULLETIN, Volume 11, Issue 3/ 2019 
leading the development of MAVs and mini UAVs to meet the requirements of India’s 
military and civil forces. The organization, which was previously succeeded in the 
development of three MAVs (Black Kite, Golden Hawk, and Pushpak), is now developing a 
mini UAV named Suchan (figure 2). These micro air vehicles are man-portable and have 
image processing capabilities, besides, these portable GCS commands, control and display, 
optical flow-based obstacle avoidance; and horizon detection using computer vision 
techniques. 
     
 
Figure 2: SUCHAN UAV  
 
 
 
Figure 3: MOSQUITO by IAI 
The somewhat bigger Spy the Mosquito developed by IAI (figure 3) is worked by a two-man 
team and has double the range, IAI said. Every one of the autonomous MAVs can fly for an 
hour while transmitting pictures back to their administrators. 
The Mosquito 1 and Mosquito 1.5 smaller scale rambles have a wingspan of 33 centimetres 
(13 inches). Their little size enables them to fly through windows and to give pictures to 
military units behind it. The Mosquito has officially finished a few effective 40-minute 
preliminary flights. 
NAV – Nano Air Vehicles are proposed to be of the extent of sycamore seeds and utilized in 
swarms for purposes, for example, radar perplexity or possibly, if camera, impetus and 
control sub-frameworks can be made little enough, for ultra-short-range observation. 
 
Figure 4: BLACK HORNET developed by Prox Dynamics 
Black Hornet (figure 4) would be a perfect example of an advanced aerial NAV that is being 
used in military spy operations all over the world. The unit measures around 10 × 2.5 cm (4 
× 1 in) and furnishes troops on the ground with neighborhood situational mindfulness. They 
are little enough to fit in one hand and weigh simply over a large portion of an ounce (16 g, 
including batteries). 
The UAV is outfitted with a camera, which gives the administrator full-movement video and 
still pictures. They were created as a component of a £20 million contract for 160 units with 
Marlborough Communications Ltd. 
An administrator can be prepared to work the Black Hornet in as meager as 20 minutes. The 
air vehicle has three cameras; one looking forward, one looking straight down, and one 
pointing descending at 45 degrees. A Black Hornet bundle contains two helicopters, and

[Page 5 / 16 | chars: 3627]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

187 
Comparative Review Study of Military and Civilian Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) 
 
INCAS BULLETIN, Volume 11, Issue 3/ 2019 
since a 90% charge is come to in 20-25 minutes, the equivalent as its drifting time, with a top 
speed is 11 mph (18 km/h) when one should be revived the other is prepared to fly. 
2.3 VTOL Unmanned elevated frameworks 
The upsides of VTOL UAS are the versatility of the stages for remote zone tasks without the 
need for runway buildings. A greater amount of the flow VTOL stages is little, with most 
working with electric engines from battery-powered batteries restricting flight terms to short 
of what 60 minutes [10]. 
They have constrained sensor payload capacities yet as scaling down of sensors 
happens; the stages demonstrated to be more profitable for use in speedy investigation 
circumstances. 
Representations of the effectiveness of VTOL UAS phases are to assistance regulation 
execution responsibilities, where a low-height, drifting ability with depiction information 
catch is valuable for finding out an occurrence scene. 
Logical research applications requiring standing around capacity over a settled review 
plot of moderately little size (e.g., horticultural field) are another territory in which this class 
of UAV has huge potential. 
Quad-rotors are the most well-known case of this sort of setups. The thought is to have 
the rotor edges all settled in pitch and to accomplish pushed changes on every rotor by 
changing its speed of revolution. 
Every rotor is exclusively determined by an electric engine mounted at the rotor head. 
Along these lines, for instance, for the flying machine to push ahead the rotational speed of 
the two back rotors would be expanded to pitch the airship nose-down and coordinate the 
subsequently pushed vector advances. 
In the meantime, the aggregate push must be expanded to forestall the loss of stature 
and, when set up in forwarding flight, the rotor speeds should again be blended. The design 
is normally more blast touchy than alternate arrangements, and its control reaction must be 
relied upon to be slower. 
Along these lines, the accomplishment of adequate control might be sufficiently 
troublesome in the still quality of research facility conditions, and significantly riskier in the 
tempestuous demeanour of urban tasks. 
Notwithstanding these tests Quadrotors outfitted with camera payloads are as yet 
utilized in remote detecting activities due to fabrication straightforward. Indeed, even a 
newbie UAV pilot with some simple preparing can fly it. India’s safeguard inquires about 
organization DRDO has built up an Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV) particularly intended 
for against fearmongering and counter-insurrection tasks, which will be enlisted into the 
military constantly culmination. 
The 1.5 kg UAV, called Netra is a collective improvement venture among idea Forge, 
and Defense Research and Development Organization Pune-based labs, The UAV is fit for 
working in all the contention theatres, including urban quarters, in a circumstance like that of 
the 26/11 dread assaults, the evaluated expense of Netra is Rs 20 lakhs, yet the cost could 
change if extra segments like warm camera are included according to the prerequisites of the 
security offices concerned and their utilization, the UAV has been intended to complete 
observation in a territory of 1.5 KM Line of Sight (LOS) and has a perseverance limit of 30 
minutes of battery charge [3,4]. 
Aside from that, Netra (figure 5), is outfitted with a goals CCD camera with a skillet/tilt 
and zoom to encourage more extensive observation.

[Page 6 / 16 | chars: 2809]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sudhir Kumar CHATURVEDI, Raj SEKHAR, Saikat BANERJEE, Hutanshu KAMAL 
188 
 
INCAS BULLETIN, Volume 11, Issue 3/ 2019 
It can likewise be fitted with warm cameras to do night activities with an operational 
elevation of 200 meters most extreme, having a vertical take-off and landing limit (VTOL) 
and is furnished with a remote transmitter. 
Notwithstanding that, the in-fabricated safeguard highlights enable Netra to profit to 
base for loss of correspondence or low battery. 
       
 
Figure 5: NETRA jointly developed by Idea-Forge and 
DRDO 
Figure 6: TIKAD Drone Developed by Duke 
Robotics 
As shown in the figure 6, in September 2017, Duke Robotics has reported that Israel's 
Ministry of Defense has supported Duke Robotics' TIKAD ramble as creative future war 
zone innovation. 
The TIKAD is planned with a lightweight, continuous 6 DOF (degrees of opportunity) 
Robotic gimbal with a weight of under 10 kg. 
It can convey and balance out up to 3x the heaviness of the gimbal. The TIKAD can be sent 
above water and finishes with a base hazard circumstance [3, 4]. 
As of not long ago, troops must be there to explore. The organization's restrictive mechanical 
adjustment innovation empowers the TIKAD to assimilate the force of a weapon, taking into 
consideration pinpoint focusing on and shooting exactness that can ensure troops in an 
assortment of dangerous circumstances. 
By decreasing the requirement for ground troops, the TIKAD speaks to a remarkable 
advance towards limiting military and regular citizen losses, and the innovation is picking up 
help on a worldwide premise. 
2.4 LASE/LALE UAS 
Low-altitude, Short Endurance, and Low-Altitude, Long Endurance UAS happen in a variety 
of sizes and setups, from back-packable, hand-propelled stages to sling dispatch stages. A 
portion of the more typical, minimal effort LASE/LALE stages being used today is those that 
are lightweight and can be hand-propelled, permitting flexible field condition tasks in 
territories without active surface runways. 
The impediment of hand-dispatch stages is their relatively brief length operational abilities 
of 45 min– 2 h, and a lessened payload limit [1]. These UAS are generally easy to work, with 
flight controls like RC models and rearranged ground-control stations that take into account 
little teams. The majority of the remote detecting frameworks are small, disentangled 
cameras or spilling camcorders in either sunshine (shading or B/W) or infrared (B/W) video 
gave of surface items being imaged, albeit expanded abilities are empowering direct picture 
georeferencing in a portion of these frameworks. 
DRDO structured 'Nishant' a LALE class UAV with AUW of 340 Kg sling propelled, a 
versatile conservative framework for day and night war zone observation, surveillance, target

[Page 7 / 16 | chars: 2262]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

189 
Comparative Review Study of Military and Civilian Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) 
 
INCAS BULLETIN, Volume 11, Issue 3/ 2019 
assignment, ordnance fire course, and harm appraisal as shown in the figure 7. Following 
quite a while of improvement and preliminaries, it was conveyed to the Indian Army in 
2013. 
   
 
Figure 7: NISHANT UAV by DRDO  
          Figure 8: Bird-Eye 650D Developed by IAI 
Bird-Eye 650D, (figure 8) a small tactical unmanned aerial system (UAS) designed and 
developed by MALAT Division of Israel Aerospace Industries (IAI), entered serial 
production in June 2016. The UAS is intended for a variety of military and paramilitary 
missions such as over-the-hill intelligence, surveillance, target acquisition and 
reconnaissance (ISTAR), patrol, urban operation, counter-terrorism, convoy escort, radio 
relay, and law enforcement. Its civilian applications include surveillance of disaster areas, 
water resource management, mapping, and powerline inspections [10]. 
The Skylark II (figure 9) one of the LALE class UAV systems is a short proximity strategic 
unmanned air vehicle (UAV) framework essentially intended for Israeli, Canadian and 
Korean guard powers to complete insight, observation, target securing, and surveillance 
activities. The UAV was structured and fabricated by Elbit Systems. It was first divulged in 
2006 and is gotten from the Skylark I. The UAV is fundamentally utilized for most 
exceedingly awful climate observation, information gathering and target stamping for 
missions going more than 50km [10]. 
The Skylark II is fueled by a single electrical engine fabricated by Bental Industries. The 
motor can deliver the greatest of 4kW. It is controlled by a battery pack contained in the 
payload unit underneath the first blast. 
The drive framework utilizes dual channel perpetual magnet brushless engines. A controller 
turns off one channel while cruising as this requires less power. On the off chance that one of 
the frameworks comes up short, the control will consequently change to another framework, 
enabling the vehicle to proceed with the mission or drop and come back to the ground 
securely. 
     
 
Figure 9: Searcher 2 developed by IAI  
       Figure 10: Skylark 3 developed by IAI

[Page 8 / 16 | chars: 3011]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sudhir Kumar CHATURVEDI, Raj SEKHAR, Saikat BANERJEE, Hutanshu KAMAL 
190 
 
INCAS BULLETIN, Volume 11, Issue 3/ 2019 
In February 2016, Elbit Systems disclosed the Skylark 3 unmanned air framework, 
additionally uncovering it had just picked up a choice by an undisclosed client. In the 
figure:10, the Skylark 3 is proposed to help detachment and division-level units, having a 4.8 
m (15.7 ft) wingspan and a most extreme take-off weight of 45 kg (99 lb) with a 10 kg (22 
lb) payload. 
It is conveyed from a pneumatic launcher on the ground or mounted on a vehicle, with a 
working scope of more than 54 miles, (62 mi; 100 km), an administration roof of 15,000 ft 
(4,600 m), and flight autonomy of up to 6 hours. Two air vehicles can be worked all the 
while utilizing a mutual ground control station. 
2.5 MALE-medium altitude long endurance UAV 
Heron TP (Eitan), a MALE (UAV) is a high-end variation of the Heron 1 (figure:11) UAV 
created by Israel Aerospace Industries (IAI) to meet various mission needs of the military. 
The Eitan MALE UAV's main goal capacities incorporate observation, surveillance, fight 
harm appraisal, target procurement, airborne refuelling, knowledge social occasion, and 
rocket safeguard. 
A full-scale model of the Heron TP was shown amid an incident that occurred in Berlin 
Expo Center Airport on June 2016. Heron TP unmanned air framework requests and 
conveyances IAI's MALAT Division divulged the Heron TP unmanned flying vehicle amid 
the Paris Air Show held on June 2007. In June 2008, IAI and Rheinmetall Defense 
Electronics (RDE) entered a co-task consent to offer Heron TP for the SAATEG middle of 
the road arrangement of the German Armed Forces. Some Heron TP rambles were drafted 
into the White Eagle Squadron of the Israeli Air Force (IAF) in February 2010. One of them 
was slammed amid an experimental drill in January 2012. The Indian Government affirmed 
the buy often outfitted Heron TP UAVs for the Indian Air Force in September 2015. In 
January 2016, Germany declared its choice to rent up to five equipped Heron TPs as an 
internal arrangement. 
The new UAVs are required to enter benefit in 2018. A decent case of a small-scale ramble 
is the FULMAR settled wing smaller scale UAV which has a most extreme departure weight 
of around 20 kg. It was produced by Thales and Wake building, and it has endurance of 12 
hours and range of about 90km. The best speed of this UAV is 100km/h, and the greatest 
height it can get to is 4000m with a payload of 8 kilograms [10]. 
 
 
Figure 11: Heron TP by IAI 
The 14m-long, Heron TP MALE unmanned flying machine framework (UAV) highlights an 
all-composite airframe with high-wing cantilever monoplane plan. The principle wings, 
spreading over 26m, have a high-angle proportion. The UAV likewise includes a twin-blast 
arrangement, where blasts are stretched out from the wings to frame the tail structure, 
comprising of two tails associated by a single tailplane [10]. A couple of vertical tail blades

[Page 9 / 16 | chars: 2567]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

191 
Comparative Review Study of Military and Civilian Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) 
 
INCAS BULLETIN, Volume 11, Issue 3/ 2019 
is mounted at the closures of the tailplane. The retractable landing gear is masterminded in a 
tricycle form with two fundamental units installed under the tail blasts and a nose wheel 
under the fuselage. With a substantial inside volume, the UAV can convey different payloads 
weighing 1,000kg. The Heron TP configuration can likewise be adjusted to an assortment of 
missions. The Heron TP's main goal frameworks incorporate oceanic watch radar (MPR), 
electronic helps measures (ESM), electronic and interchanges insight (ELINT/COMINT), 
and manufactured opening radar (SAR). 
It can likewise be introduced with M-19HD multi-sensor electro-optical payload. The 
constant symbolism and telemetry information gathered by the payloads are transmitted to 
the ground control station utilizing viewable pathway proliferation and satellite interchanges 
(SATCOM). 
The UAV takes into account concurrent task of various payloads for multi-mission 
necessities. India’s purchase of 10 Heron TP proposes that ordinary turboprop-driven 
outfitted automatons are of constrained utility to India and its Stealthy turbofan-driven 
American Avenger and India's own Ghatak UCAV Projects which will be a genuine distinct 
advantage concerning Indian Military. 
.
 
Figure 12: RUSTOM 2 developed by DRDO 
As shown in figure 12, Rustom 2 or TAPAS-BH-201 is a MALE (UAV), intended to do 
observation and surveillance missions for the Indian Armed Forces. It is equipped for 
conveying an alternate mix of payloads including manufactured gap radar, electronic insight 
frameworks, and situational mindfulness frameworks. The UAV has autonomy of 24 hours 
and is like the American Predator UAV. The UAV is capable of carrying different 
combinations of payloads like synthetic aperture radar, electronic intelligence systems, and 
situational awareness payloads. DRDO did a test run of Rustom 2 on 25 February 2018, at 
the Aeronautical Test Range (ATR) situated in Chalker, Chitradurga region. This was the 
first trip of the UAV in client arrangement with higher power motor [4]. 
2.6 HALE UAVs 
The “Eitan” belongs to the HALE (High Altitude Long Endurance) family of UAVs that 
participate in missions that require long periods of non-stop air time. Their endurance 
addresses the operational need for a presence in a specific area and allows the IAF to 
maintain aerial continuity. As a multi-role aircraft, the “Eitan” is responsible for general

[Page 10 / 16 | chars: 2250]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sudhir Kumar CHATURVEDI, Raj SEKHAR, Saikat BANERJEE, Hutanshu KAMAL 
192 
 
INCAS BULLETIN, Volume 11, Issue 3/ 2019 
surveillance, long-range target photography, and designation of targets for other aircraft to 
attack [10]. (HALE) Unmanned airborne vehicle (UAV). AURA is being intended to be a 
strategic stealth airplane ready to convey laser-guided weapons. Preliminary design pictures 
demonstrate it to be fueled by a locally manufactured Kaveri turbofan, and furnished with 
inner weapons coves. The vehicle can work at the highest elevation of 30,000 ft out to scope 
of 300 km, with an all-up weight of 1.5 tons [10]. The program was begun in 2009 and has 
been halted and restarted a few times from that point forward. The most recent restart in 
2014 pursues a coordinated effort with the Aeronautical Development Authority (ADA) and 
has seen the AURA restored under the name Ghatak (Lethal). The AURA/Ghatak is relied 
upon to be flown by numerous Indian offices, for example, the Aeronautical Development 
Establishment (ADE), the Defense Electronics Application Laboratory (DEAL), the Defense 
Avionics Research Establishment (DARE), and the Gas Turbine Research Establishment 
(GTRE) – all divisions of the DRDO a fully developed flying prototype expected to be 
completed by 2023 (figure 13). 
 
 
Figure 13: ARUA/GAHATK being developed jointly by DRDO and ADE 
2.7 AUVs 
Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUVs) are not new. They have been used for 
oceanographic studies and for military purposes for several years. But, to we users of 
commercial survey services, it seemed that most works had concentrated on the vehicles 
themselves rather than on the use of such vehicles in surveying and site investigation. 
Nevertheless, the deployment of AUV-bourne sensors appeared to have the potential to solve 
the problems of accurately surveying deep-water sites.In the late 1990’s BP surveyors and 
site investigation specialists vigorously pursued the technology and its application to oil 
industry requirements[18]. In 2001 we conducted our first commercial surveys using the 
technology. This paper outlines our experiences, contrasts them against our previous 
expectations, and suggests future directions. 
 
Figure 14: MAYA AUV

[Page 11 / 16 | chars: 4117]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

193 
Comparative Review Study of Military and Civilian Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) 
 
INCAS BULLETIN, Volume 11, Issue 3/ 2019 
2.8 Indian AUVs capabilities 
Our review of AUV capabilities confirmed the potential of the technology in two areas: - as 
a replacement for conventional ship-bourne hydrographic survey tasks. - as a replacement for 
conventional tethered Remotely Operated Vehicle (ROV) tasks. We recognised two 
significant limiting factors. Initially, there are the batteries. Limitations in battery power 
restricted either endurance or the sensors that the vehicle could carry. Secondly, there is the 
vehicle navigation and control. Whilst all of the navigation components, in particular inertial 
systems, were available and all of the sensors were in existence, they had not been integrated 
into a commercial autonomous vehicle before. Indian AUVs. As they have similar 
capabilities they were incorporated into active NAVY services in the past [14]. The Maya 
AUV fig. 14 belongs to a class of small autonomous underwater vehicles [13] that have been 
gaining popularity in marine application areas such as oceanography, monitoring the coastal 
environment, as well as in naval applications such as mapping of naval mines for mine 
countermeasures. 
The development of Maya was jointly funded by NIO and the Department of Electronics and 
Information Technology, New Delhi, India (known as the Department of Information 
Technology before 2012). The AUV's development began in 2003, [15] completed 
horizontal plane tests in May 2005, [16] with the first set of dive missions tested on May 12, 
2006, [17] making it India's first indigenously developed AUV for scientific applications. 
AUV-150 (UUV) being developed by Central Mechanical Engineering Research Institute 
(CMERI) scientists in Durgapur in the Indian state of West Bengal. The project is sponsored 
by the Ministry of Earth Sciences and has technical assistance from IIT-Kharagpur [21]. The 
vehicle was built with the intent of coastal security like mine counter-measures, coastal 
monitoring and reconnaissance. AUV 150 can be used to study aquatic life, for mapping of 
sea-floor and minerals along with monitoring of environmental parameters, such as current, 
temperature, depth and salinity. It can also be useful in cable and pipeline surveys. It is built 
to operate 150 metres under the sea and have cruising speed of up to four knots. 
2.9 Current Statistics of Indian and Israel UAVs 
In 2009, the Indian Air Force purchased 10 Harops in a $100 million contract with Israel 
Aerospace Industries. In February 2013, the Indian Air Force made a $280 million deal with 
Israel Aerospace Industries for a new series of Heron medium-altitude, long-endurance 
drones. In the two decades that have followed, Indian armed forces have acquired more than 
200 UAVs mostly of Israeli origin. DRDO which had been dabbling with UAV design for 
some time also got in the act and working in collaboration with Indian industry has made 
some progress in creating indigenous capacity. The perceived necessity of close surveillance 
was the original purpose of UAVs [3]. However, sensing enhanced possibilities with 
maturing of relevant technologies at home, Indian armed forces have widened their horizons 
to include them for kinetic action against suitable targets. Therefore, it is entirely possible 
that a future surgical strike across the LOC may well be a precision missile attack executed 
by employing UAVs. Besides a small number of IAF’s HAROP Unmanned Combat Aerial 
Vehicles (UCAV) designed to neutralize radiating targets, currently, Indian armed forces 
have some 200+ Medium Altitude Long Endurance (MALE) Searcher and Heron UAVs of 
Israeli origin. Searcher, the smaller of the two is limited both in payload capacity (150 lbs) as 
well as the operational ceiling of (20,000ft.). However, with its abilities to stay aloft for up to 
18 hours and carry a variety of sensors, it has rendered yeoman’s service along the Western 
borders and Indian shores. Heron, the larger of the two MALE UAVs is more versatile. With

[Page 12 / 16 | chars: 4174]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sudhir Kumar CHATURVEDI, Raj SEKHAR, Saikat BANERJEE, Hutanshu KAMAL 
194 
 
INCAS BULLETIN, Volume 11, Issue 3/ 2019 
a take-off weight of 1,150 Kg, it can carry a 250 Kg. payload of sensors, stay aloft up to 52 
hours (depending on the chosen flight profile) and with operating ceiling of 32,000 ft, it has 
proven to be a handy surveillance tool along the mountainous Northern borders. On the 
acquisition horizon, there are some other systems which when inducted would give a 
quantum leap in capability. From Israel, India’s dependable supplier of choice there is Heron 
TP, an upgraded version of Heron. Israel was inhibited in the sale of this system because of 
its voluntary moratorium on selling dual-use strategic assets to parties not a signatory to the 
Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR). Following India’s entry into MTCR in 2016, 
an agreement has been reached for the purchase of 10 Heron TPs.India has also been keen to 
acquire both armed as well as unarmed Predators from the United States. Indian Navy’s 
request for 22 Guardian UAVs (a maritime variant of Predator MQ-9) has already been 
approved by the US Govt. IAF’s demand for 100 Predator C Avenger drones appears to be in 
the process. Sale of armed UAVs has been a matter of discussion between the US and India. 
The Iranian effort to develop new armed UAVs and is worrying Israel. In recent years the 
Israeli Air Force (IAF) has foiled attempts by Hezbollah in Lebanon and Hamas in Gaza to 
penetrate Israeli airspace, probably for intelligence purposes. Last year, IAI unveiled the 
Drone Guard system for UAV detection, identification and flight disruption. The ELTA 
division of IAI has developed a unique system that integrates a 3-Dimensional (3D) radar 
and Electro-Optical (EO) sensors for detection and identification, as well as dedicated 
Electronic Attack (EA) jamming systems for disrupting UAV flight [3]. To detect low 
signature, low-level and low-speed airborne targets, ELTA has adapted to this specific 
mission its 3D radars, which include the ELM-2026D, ELM-2026Band ELM-2026BF for 
short (10km), medium (15km) and long (20 km) ranges, respectively, with unique UAV 
detection and tracking algorithms, as well as adapting them with EO sensors for visual 
identification of the target. To disrupt the hostile UAV, ELTA has developed advanced 
adaptive jamming systems which can be used in concert with its detection and identification 
sensors, or as a continuously operated stand-alone system. The jamming disrupts the UAV's 
flight and can either cause it to return to its point-of-origin (‘Return Home’ function) or to 
shut down and make a crash landing. 
2.10 Future 
Indian armed force intends to draft 5,000 UAVs throughout the following ten years. 
Regardless of whether the expressed numbers show up to some degree hopeful yet they 
recommend the profundity to which Indian military are intending to incorporate UAVs in 
each part of their operational theory. UAVs' jobs have up to this point been constrained to 
C4ISTAR capacities. Future acceptances would without a doubt empower supporting the rest 
of the abilities significantly further. Likewise, outfitted UAVs would likewise in all 
likelihood turn into a critical part of the Indian military's hostile abilities. Work is as of now 
in progress to coordinate HELINA against tank rocket with Rustom H. When operational it 
could likewise be utilized for strikes of the degree and kind as Indian armed force's careful 
strike over the LOC in September 2016. Fundamental components to empower motor UAV 
strikes at longer ranges are additionally relentlessly set up. 
GAGAN Indian satellite-based expansion framework (SBAS) vital for the upgrade of 
SATNAV signals for the precise route is now operational. Extra satellites solely for military 
correspondence would outfit the extra data transfer capacity required for the task at 
broadened ranges [10]. Rustom 2 with its heavier casing, more noteworthy payload limit and 
continuance of up to 30 hours are probably going to be the indigenous stage of decision for 
an Indian outfitted UAV armada. In the more distant future AURA, a stealthy UCAV being

[Page 13 / 16 | chars: 4053]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

195 
Comparative Review Study of Military and Civilian Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) 
 
INCAS BULLETIN, Volume 11, Issue 3/ 2019 
produced by DRDO would include another club taken care of. Not exactly obvious yet but 
rather UAVs are set to wind up a noteworthy segment in the battle capacity of the Indian 
military. REHOVOT, Israel (Reuters) - Israeli protection firm Elbit Systems (June 2018) 
divulged a 1.6-ton unmanned airship vehicle (UAV) intended to fly in the airspace at present 
saved for steered nonmilitary personnel planes as a race warms up to convey military 
automatons outside battle zones. 
India's first rocket equipped automatons that will give it the ability to steal out stand 
away cross-outskirt strikes are prepared in Israel, in front of the first historically speaking 
visit to the country by an Indian PM. The Heron TP-outfitted automatons, fit for 
distinguishing, following and bringing down focuses with air to ground rockets, have been 
on the military list of things to get for quite a long time, before the program was optimized in 
September 2015, as detailed by ET. 
A form of Elbit's Hermes 900 Star Liner is being amassed for the Swiss military and is 
planned to be conveyed in 2019 of an arrangement worth $200 million. The StarLiner, being 
propelled in front of one week from now's Farnborough Airshow, is gotten from the Hermes 
900 worked by Brazil for observation amid the 2014 World Cup [3]. The automaton is 
agreeable with NATO criteria, qualifying it to be incorporated into regular citizen airspace. 
Israel's automaton trades in 2005-2012 totalled $4.6 billion, as per consultancy Frost and 
Sullivan. They came to $525 million out of 2016, representing 7 percent of Israel's resistance 
sends out. U.S. military automaton producers are competing for a bigger offer of the 
worldwide market, which economic scientist the Teal Group conjectures will ascend from 
$2.8 billion of every 2016 to $9.4 billion of every 2025. In 2009, the Indian Air Force 
acquired 10 Harps in a $100 million contract with Israel Aerospace Industries. 
In February 2013, the Indian Air Force made a $280 million manage Israel Aerospace 
Industries for another arrangement of Heron medium-height, long-continuance rambles. In 
late 2013, India's Ministry of Defense dismissed an offer by Israel Aerospace Industries and 
India's Defense Research and Development Organization (DRDO) to mutually build up 
another form of the Heron UAV be that as it may, India turned down the offer. 
The capability of UAVs is exceptionally vast. In the 21st century, DRDO is resolved to 
convey state of-the-craftsmanship UAV frameworks to the Indian Armed Forces. The 
advances portrayed above are the base for the future UAV improvement programs. Cutting 
edge projects of DRDO incorporate UCAV, smaller scale and little, multi-job, and solar-
powered UAVs. Innovation forecasts for the following decade conceive 50 percent 
expansion in perseverance, quiet motors, self-fixing, and harm repaying structures with 
continuous observing of auxiliary wellbeing, rotorcraft of high speeds, multichannel 
information obtaining frameworks, full programmed control of flight and mission, and so on 
[10]. 
2.11 Case scenarios in which drones where are used in India 
UAVs are extraordinary power multipliers, and there must be cooperative energy between 
the three Services to improve their work. One beneficial thing which is going on in the 
ongoing years is that all acquisitions are cleared by the Chiefs of Staff Committee, 
rotationally headed by the senior the majority of the three Service Chiefs, and they work now 
on regular particulars to the degree conceivable. 
The subsequent coordination is helpful. The UAVs could be utilized for diverse undertakings 
productively, in composed assignments. Directly, the three Indian Services have somewhat 
limited quantities of these flying vehicles, and each Service is looking towards its expanding 
singular prerequisites. There ought to be an exceptional ascent in their numbers in the

[Page 14 / 16 | chars: 4166]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sudhir Kumar CHATURVEDI, Raj SEKHAR, Saikat BANERJEE, Hutanshu KAMAL 
196 
 
INCAS BULLETIN, Volume 11, Issue 3/ 2019 
coming years. In as much as the Army is concerned, the Herons are performing exceedingly 
well in reconnaissance missions in the high elevation sloping areas as additionally giving 
primary data to move components in the nation's southern deserts. They would provide the 
objective contributions to rockets and furthermore PSDA on the commitment of targets. This 
job has viably been tried amid activities. 
The Herons have possessed the capacity to fly in the second role and along these lines 
operate at scopes of 400 km. In high height regions, there are screening issues a few times, 
yet they are effortlessly defeated through satellite interchanges (SATCOM) [7]. That 
expands the scope of these frameworks to even 1000 km. The Searcher Mark II is being 
utilized in the precipitous district as likewise in the fields and semi-deserts. It is to the credit 
of Indian UAV pilots that they have advanced the flying vehicle effectively under India's 
changing and extreme climate conditions. 
The UAVs have given significant contributions about any interruptions hanging in the 
balance of Control (LoC) as additionally on issues relating to the landscape which aid 
operational arranging. There are issues however still about the nature of pictures acquired 
while utilizing the Synthetic Aperture Radar (SAR) [20]. Ongoing universal enhancements 
in SAR give a clear image of the question, and that is the place the exertion is going at this 
point. Numerous fear mongers and activists in the north or north-east locales of India cover-
up in zones of thick foliage. 
There is a need to get astounding SAR gadgets to create great pictures. In any case, the 
Searcher Mark I assortment is a short-range UAV which is by and large appropriately 
utilized in the bumpy locales and fields. The Nishant, an indigenous item made by DRDO 
which is propelled from a vehicle and recouped by parachute, is conceivably under 
acceptance and would be used in the fields. All UAVs by and by held by the Army are being 
controlled at the operational dimension and serve the requirements at the more elevated 
amount. There is a desperate prerequisite of UAVs at the strategic dimension which should 
be given to driving increase results at the ground level for undertaking missions with 
accurate insight. 
Further, in the Indian condition, there is an immediate need to weaponize these 
unmanned elevated stages to obliterate threatening focuses on exactness. The UCAVs are 
working in Afghanistan and causing the exact annihilation of pinpoint targets. This has 
prompted passing of various best pioneers of Al Qaida pioneers, accordingly lessening the 
power of the foundation. That is a decent case for the military of any nation, India 
notwithstanding [21]. The errands pictured are observation, especially of landing strips, 
radars, air guard weapons, field safeguards and automated segments; from that point double-
dealing by utilizing electronic payloads, obliteration of chosen focus by lingering rockets, 
and afterwards PSDA. IAF's Searcher Mark II and Heron are like the frameworks held by the 
Indian Army while Harrop, the standing around the rocket, can be utilized in high thickness 
strife and counter uprising for accuracy strikes. It has a decent, 1000 km range and six hours 
autonomy Harrop can be propelled both against land-based and ocean-based targets. It 
recognizes solid heartbeats from correspondence targets, for example, rockets and radars and 
hits them at the source. It is conceivable to dispatch the Harrop from ground, ocean, and air. 
The Indian Navy by and by will have a squadron of Searcher Mark II and Heron [22]. They 
are situated at Kochi and Porbandar. Conceivably two more squadrons are made 
arrangements for the southeastern drift and the Andaman and Nicobar Islands. All these 
UAVs are arriving based and are controlled by the Command Headquarters. A prerequisite 
of ship-based rotating UAVs which can work successfully with a bearer team and give 
insinuate constant observation is under thought [10].

[Page 15 / 16 | chars: 4068]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

197 
Comparative Review Study of Military and Civilian Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) 
 
INCAS BULLETIN, Volume 11, Issue 3/ 2019 
3. CONCLUSIONS 
In this paper, we classified Indian and Israeli UAVs based on their platform and performance 
characteristics and previous decade's expansion of UAS stages and sensors. The article also 
shows the pattern of progressively scaled-down segments guarantees a time of custom-fitted 
frameworks for on-request remote detecting at exceptional dimensions of sensor exactness 
and navigational precision. This will enable the capacity of specialists to remotely build-up 
study locales at small spatial scales for fine-scale extends that can be over and over-tested 
without falling back on ground-control focus, much of the time forestalling the requirement 
for site visits. While expenses can be hard to survey permission or per flight hour because of 
fluctuating prerequisites for the workforce, sensors, and strategic help, enhanced unwavering 
quality and innovative scaling down might be relied upon to lessen procurement or activity 
costs. The symbolism got from UAVs can enormously bolster in numerous applications 
going from extensive scale mapping, urban displaying to vegetation structure mapping. 
Nevertheless, there are confinements like – i) impediment in the extent of the investigation 
territory, ii) imperative in the handling of the substantial volume of information, iii) 
prerequisite of expansive scale preparing and vast storage room, and so forth. Moreover, 
existing highlights catching and extraction systems should be enhanced for preparing of high 
dimensional UAV information. UAVs can perform proficient studies for calamity inclined or 
physically difficult to reach regions, fast harm evaluation of avalanches, surges, and 
earthquakes to enhance rescue and assistance measures. 
REFERENCES 
[1] * * * Reg Austin Aeronautical Consultant, ―UNMANNED AIRCRAFT SYSTEMS UAVS DESIGN, 
DEVELOPMENT AND DEPLOYMENT, A John Wiley and Sons, Ltd., Publication. 
[2] F. S. Haydon, Aeronautics in the Union and Confederate Armies, With a Survey of Military Aeronautics Prior 
to 1861. In Military Ballooning During the Early Civil War; Johns Hopkins University Press: Baltimore, 
MD, USA, Volume 1, 2000. 
[3] * * * https://www.economist.com/technology-quarterly/2017-06-08/civilian-drones 
[4] * * * https://www.isro.gov.in/applications-of-unmanned-aerial-vehicle-uav-based-remote-sensing-ne-region. 
[5] D. Bowen, Encyclopedia of War Machines: An Historical Survey of the World’s Great Weapons, Peerage 
Books: London, UK, 1977. 
[6] J. Hannavy Ed., Encyclopedia of Nineteenth-Century Photography, Routledge, Taylor & Francis Group, 
Volume 1, pp. 14–15, 2007. 
[7] V. G. Ambrosia, S. Wegener, T. Zajkowski, D. V. Sullivan, S. Buechel, F. Enomoto, E. A. Hinkley, B. 
Lobitz, S. Schoenung, The Ikhana UAS western states fire imaging missions: From concept to reality 
(2006–2010), Geocarto Int. 2011. 
[8] * * * http://news.bbc.co.uk/2/hi/middle_east/3571261.stm 
[9] * * * http://dronecenter.bard.edu/about/ 
[10] * * *  Next Generation Air Transportation System Unmanned Aircraft Systems Research, Development, and 
Demonstration Roadmap, March 15, 2012. 
[11] J. Torres-Sánchez, F. López-Granados & J. M. Peña, An automatic object-based method for optimal 
thresholding in UAV images: Application for vegetation detection in herbaceous crops, Computers and 
Electronics in Agriculture, 114, 43-52, 2015. 
[12] J. Primicerio, S. F. Di Gennaro, E. Fiorillo, L. Genesio & E. Lugato, A flexible unmanned aerial vehicle for 
precision agriculture, Precision Agriculture, 13 (4), 517-523, 2012. 
[13] * * * http://www.iisc.ernet.in/~currsci/may102006/1202.pdf 
[14] J. Yuh, A Neural Net Controller For Underwater Robotic Vehicles, IEEE Journal of Oceanic Engineering, 
15, 161-166, 1990. 
[15] * * * http://robotics.usc.edu/~ampereir/Files/draftminutes-PRSG2.pdf 
[16] * * * http://robotics.usc.edu/~ampereir/Files/Synopsis_prsg3.pdf 
[17] * * * http://robotics.usc.edu/~ampereir/Files/Snopsis_csir_maya.pdf

[Page 16 / 16 | chars: 1192]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Sudhir Kumar CHATURVEDI, Raj SEKHAR, Saikat BANERJEE, Hutanshu KAMAL 
198 
 
INCAS BULLETIN, Volume 11, Issue 3/ 2019 
[18] T. Ura, AUV ‘r2D4’, Its Operation, and Road Map for AUV Development, in: Advances in Unmanned 
Marine Vehicles, edited by G.N. Roberts & R. Sutton, IEE Control Series 69, 2006. 
[19] F. Song & S. M. Smith, Design of sliding mode fuzzy controllers for an autonomous underwater vehicle 
without system model, (OCEANS 2000 MTS/IEEE Conference and Exhibition, Providence, Rhode 
Island–The Ocean State), pp. 835 – 840, 2000. 
[20] F. Song, An Edgar and Smith Samuel, Design of robust nonlinear controllers for autonomous underwater 
vehicles with comparison of simulated and at-sea test data, Journal of Vibration and Control, 8, 189 – 
217, 2002. 
[21] H. S. Kim & Y. K. Shin, Expanded Adaptive Fuzzy Sliding Mode Controller using Expert Knowledge and 
Fuzzy Basis Function Expansion for UFV Depth Control, Journal of Ocean Engineering, 34, 1080-1088, 
2007. 
[22] W. M. Bessa, M. S. Dutra & E. Kreuzer, Depth Control of Remotely Operated Underwater Vehicles using an 
Adaptive Fuzzy Sliding Mode Controller, Journal of Robotics and Autonomous System, 56, 670-677, 
2008.

