Source file: EXPO-SEDE_ET_2007_381405_EN.pdf
Relative path: EXPO-SEDE_ET_2007_381405_EN.pdf
Page count: 28
Extracted pages: 28

================================================================================

[Page 1 / 28 | chars: 161]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

JANUARY 2004 
BRIEFING PAPER
Policy Department External Policies 
 
UAVS AND UCAVS: 
DEVELOPMENTS IN THE EUROPEAN UNION 
 
SECURITY AND DEFENCE 
October 2007 
EN

[Page 2 / 28 | chars: 1486]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

This briefing paper was requested by the European Parliament's Subcommittee on Security and Defence. 
This briefing paper is published in English. 
 
Author:  
Siemon Wezeman, Leader of the Arms Transfers Project at SIPRI 
(Stockholm International Peace Research Institute) 
 
 
 
 
Briefing paper carried out within the framework agreement 
between ISIS Europe and the European Parliament  
 
 
 
 
EP/EXPO/B/SEDE/FWC/2006-10/Lot4/05 
 
 
 
Responsible Official: 
Dr Gerrard Quille 
Directorate-General for External Policies of the Union 
Policy Department 
BD4 06M081 
rue Wiertz 
B-1047 Brussels 
E-mail: 
gerrard.quille@europarl.europa.eu 
Publisher: 
European Parliament 
Manuscript completed on 2 October 2007. 
The briefing paper is available on the Internet at 
http://www.europarl.europa.eu/activities/expert/eStudies.do?languageEN 
If you are unable to download the information you require, please request a paper copy  
by e-mail : xp-poldep@europarl.europa.eu 
Brussels: European Parliament, 2007. 
Any opinions expressed in this document are the sole responsibility of the author and do not necessarily 
represent the official position of the European Parliament. 
© European Communities, 2007. 
Reproduction and translation, except for commercial purposes, are authorised, provided the source is 
acknowledged and provided the publisher is given prior notice and supplied with a copy of the 
publication. 
EP/EXPO/B/SEDE/FWC/2006-10/Lot4/05 
October 2007 
PE 381.405 
 
EN

[Page 3 / 28 | chars: 1121]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

TABLE OF CONTENTS 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Page 
 
1. Introduction 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
 
2. UAVs AND UCAVs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
 
2.1 Role of UAVs and UCAVs 
 
 
 
 
 
1 
2.2 UAV/UCAV Types 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
2.3 UCAV 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
3 
 
2.4 Risks of using UAVs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
4 
 
 
3. History of European UAVs 
 
 
 
 
 
 
5 
 
 
4. Current UAV/UCAV developments in the EU 
 
 
 
6 
 
4.1 UAV acquisition and requirements 
 
 
 
 
6 
4.2 European UAV research and development 
 
 
 
8 
4.3 European UCAV research and development 
 
 
 
9 
 
 
5. The role of the EU on the global UAV/UCAV market 
 
 
10 
 
 
Figure 1: Global exports of UAV 1997-2006 
 
 
 
11 
 
5.1 Risks of UAV export 
 
 
 
 
 
 
14 
 
 
6. Conclusion 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
15 
 
 
Appendix I: Types of UAVs  
 
 
 
 
 
 
16 
Appendix II: The main components of UAV systems 
 
 
 
17 
Appendix III: Tables 
 
Table 1: UAV/UCAV in service or planned by EU members 
 
18 
Table 2: UAV/UCAV produced or in development in EU countries  
21 
Table 3: UAV/UCAV exports by EU members 
 
 
 
23 
 
Table 4: Operational use of UAV by EU members  
 
 
24 
 
 
 
 
ii

[Page 4 / 28 | chars: 2998]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

EXECUTIVE SUMMARY 
 
 
UAVs have been around since the 1960s. However, since the mid-1980s a number of major 
technical developments have made UAVs much more effective. As a result they have 
proliferated tremendously. 
 
Several EU countries have used UAVs for decades, although their operational use in combat 
situations is limited. The EU has a small industrial capability to develop and produce most types 
of advanced UAV systems, including actual UAV aircraft, its components, the control system 
and the sensors. The only fields where the EU industry is not strongly engaged are micro UAVs 
and large, very long-range UAVs (HALE). 
 
EU members have been unsuccessful in exporting UAVs to non-EU members. Most UAVs in 
service globally are US or Israeli products. The demand for UAVs is increasing, both in the EU 
and globally. Much of the current EU demand is met by either by US UAV systems or by hybrid 
Israeli-EU systems. With US systems, generally the complete UAV system is acquired. In the 
case of the Israeli-EU systems, the UAV aircraft is acquired or licensed produced from Israel 
and fitted with European sensors. 
 
Globally UCAVs are currently limited to small numbers of lightly armed versions of ‘normal’ 
UAVs. None of these is at this moment in service in the EU. Development of UCAV technology 
demonstrators is ongoing in the EU.  
 
If EU members take part in ESDP missions it is not difficult to find enough UAVs for the 
mission. But the more important question would be whether the UAVs would be able to provide 
data quickly to the different national contingents that would comprise an ESDP mission. 
 
While Europe has adopted policies for out-of-area missions, it is still unclear how far these 
missions go beyond peacekeeping and limited peace-enforcing under UN mandates. While the 
use of UAV in such operations is demonstrated, it leaves the usefulness of UCAVs in some 
doubt. 
 
The availability of long-range unmanned strike systems such as UCAVs may lead to a lowering 
of the threshold for offensive operations that go beyond currently agreed EU policies. However, 
as demonstrated in Iraq, Afghanistan and Kosovo, an easy victory on the battlefield achieved 
with high-tech weaponry, does not solve the problem nor limits the necessity of large 
deployments of vulnerable ground troops. 
 
Since UAVs are generally rather simple systems, needing limited investments, there is room for 
several producers in the EU.  
 
UCAVs are exponentially more expensive and will, like other large systems such as combat 
aircraft and air-defence missiles, need significant investments. Cooperating on production within 
the EU seems unavoidable. However, current efforts within the EU are focused on the 
development of working concepts. While greater coordination may seem useful, it could be that 
having several independent projects is actually productive too by providing several initiatives 
for devising an effective and credible working concept. 
 
 
iii

[Page 5 / 28 | chars: 2582]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

UAVs and UCAVs: Developments in the European Union 
 
 
1. Introduction 
 
The purpose of this study is to provide a short overview of current developments in EU member 
states in relation to Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) and Unmanned Combat Aerial Vehicles 
(UCAVs). Although UAVs have been deployed by several armed forces since the 1960s, they 
have experienced a renaissance in the past 20 years. Interest in their acquisition has greatly 
increased at the same time as the relevant technology has developed. Today UAVs are seen as 
an integral and indispensable part of modern armed forces.  
 
Most EU members have acquired UAVs or plan to do so soon. Several of them have used UAVs 
in combat operations since the end of the Cold War, finding them especially useful in missions 
against guerrilla forces and terrorists. In other words, just the type of adversaries European 
forces are likely to encounter in the future when engaged in armed peacekeeping and limited 
peace-enforcement missions. 
 
More recently, UAVs have evolved from a reconnaissance system (a combat-supporting system) 
to UCAVs, an actual combat system. The US has already used lightly-armed UAVs as UCAVs 
in combat and several countries, including EU member states, are developing similar systems. 
While UAV technology is mature, the development of real high-performance unmanned combat 
aircraft – UCAVs – is a new and much more ambitious process. EU member states have already 
taken their first steps in this process. 
 
 
2. UAVs AND UCAVs 
 
A UAV is an aircraft with no onboard pilot. Instead, it is remotely-controlled or can fly 
autonomously based on pre-programmed flight plans or more complex dynamic ‘self-thinking’ 
systems. While to some extent such unmanned aircraft resemble cruise missiles1, they differ in 
that they return to base for further use once they have fulfilled their mission. 
 
2.1 Role of UAVs and UCAVs 
 
The most common roles for UAVs involve combat support. These roles include: 
• reconnaissance;  
• radar, optical and/or electro-optical sensors;  
• intelligence gathering;  
• maritime patrol;  
• search and rescue (SAR) support;  
• survey and mapping;  
• non-deadly combat role;  
• electronic countermeasures and electronic warfare (mainly the suppression of enemy air 
defences – SEAD);  
• decoy;  
• fire control/target designation (with laser designator);  
                                                 
1 Cruise missiles, like aircraft (and UAVs), derive their power to stay airborne from lift generated by their wings 
and/or their body.  
 
1

[Page 6 / 28 | chars: 3930]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

• armed combat role (UCAV) – including air-to-ground and air-to-air combat; signal relay;  
• target drone 
 
Currently, by far the majority of UAVs perform a reconnaissance role, specifically using 
optical/electro-optical sensors. Indeed, very few EU UAVs perform any other role. All EU 
UAVs are land-based systems, as are most such systems globally. The exceptions are those 
operating from ships, either in a reconnaissance role or to help target anti-ship missiles.  
 
Whereas most sizeable combat ships rely on their on-board helicopters to provide visual 
observation beyond the horizon and to identify and designate targets for anti-ship missiles, 
UAVs can perform such a role for those ships without on-board helicopters, such as frigates, 
corvettes and fast attack craft. With ranges of 50-200km, anti-ship missiles are striking targets 
far beyond the radar range of the launching ship, making the use of off-board sensors a 
necessity. Equipping ships with a small UAV helicopter is seen as a solution2.  
 
Northrop Grumman (US) has developed the Fire Scout for this role and is offering cooperation 
with Navantia (formerly IZAR: Spain) for use on Spanish F-100 Class frigates3. In Europe, 
several countries are eyeing the Austrian Camcopter for this role, and Saab (Sweden) as well as 
Eurocopter (France) are developing similar vertical take-off and landing (VTOL) UAVs. 
 
Although UAVs started as target drones in the 1920s, today this role is usually performed by 
much smaller, aircraft-launched decoy missiles, and is not normally a role designated to 
unmanned aircraft. 
 
If UAVs are used in the armed combat role they would qualify for the UCAV designation. 
However, generally the UCAV designation is not used for ‘normal’ UAVs carrying a light 
armament, but is reserved for more advanced combat UAVs. While it is possible to modify 
UAVs to perform a direct attack role in a one-way ‘suicide’ mission - and this potential misuse 
should be taken into account when exporting UAVs – technically, the vehicle has been 
transformed into a cruise missile. 
 
To survive in the often extremely hostile front-line air-defence environment one needs a high-
performance aircraft. Acquiring and operating manned reconnaissance aircraft is expensive. 
Each costs US$25-35m4, and these aircraft need a fully equipped air base as well as large 
numbers of maintenance technicians. Alternatively, the cost of a UAV to fulfil such missions 
can be less then US$1m5, with much lower operating costs due to fewer support personnel and 
no need for major ground-based infrastructure. 
 
Usually, the costs of UAV development and acquisition programmes are small compared to 
many other military acquisition programmes. Small tactical UAV systems have been developed 
for a few million US dollars, often using ‘off-the-shelf’ military and civilian components. 
                                                 
2 The idea is not new. In the late-1950s/early-1960s the US used an armed UAV helicopter for anti-submarine 
warfare for use on ships too small to carry a full-sized helicopter. The system (called DASH) failed mainly for 
technical reasons, however, and was quickly withdrawn. 
3 DEFAEI, 24 July 2002; Asian Defence Journal, Oct. 2002. 
4 The price of reconnaissance aircraft is similar to that of combat aircraft – some US$25-35m for single-engine 
aircraft such as F-16. 
5 Denmark bought 2 complete Sperwer tactical UAV systems with 12 UAV aircraft for US$55m; Defense News, 23 
Jan. 2006, p. 9. The total cost of the British tactical Phoenix UAV programme, which included some 198 UAV 
aircraft in 8 UAV systems, is estimated to have been £227-260m with each UAV estimated to have cost £0.3m. The 
Defence Suppliers Directory website, URL http://www.armedforces.co.uk/army/listings/l0101.html, Federation of 
American Scientists website, URL http://www.fas.org/man/dod-101/sys/ac/row/phoenix.htm. 
 
2

[Page 7 / 28 | chars: 3230]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

However, development and acquisition of high-end Medium-Altitude Long Endurance (MALE) 
and High-Altitude Long Endurance (HALE) systems demands major investments. For Fiscal 
Year 2007 the US Air Force requested US$287m for the acquisition of 26 RQ-1 Predator UAVs 
and US$504m for six Global Hawk UAVs. In Fiscal Years 2004, 2005 and 2006 the US spent a 
total of US$2.66bn on 295 UAVs of different types6.  
 
2.2 UAV/UCAV Types 
 
UAVs are often categorized based on performance (linked often to size). There are several 
categorizations from producers, users and researchers. (These are listed in Appendix I.) UAVs 
can be classified according to the way their flight is controlled, of which there are three 
methods: pre-programmed; remote control; self-thinking (which can be combined). Each means 
of control provides both challenges and opportunities.  
 
• The most basic control is by pre-programmed flight. This is simple, does not need 
technically difficult and disturbance-sensitive data-links for control, and gives ranges 
beyond the line-of-sight. However, the system is inflexible. Once airborne the UAV 
follows a fixed path. It cannot ‘take a second look’ at something that seems interesting. If 
the UAV needs to fly as low as possible, it is also dependent on good information of the 
terrain. 
 
• Remote-control is the most common control system for UAVs. By radio, the operator 
receives flight data from the UAV and sends flight commands back. The weak points of 
this system lie in the vulnerability of the continuous radio links, which reveal the 
positions of both the controller and the UAV, and the fact that radio links limit the 
UAV’s range. More advanced, less vulnerable radio links and indirect radio links (e.g. 
via satellites or relay UAVs) are a partial solution. 
 
• Self-thinking UAVs are still a futuristic option. The technical challenges to develop a 
fully autonomous UAV are still insurmountable. Nevertheless, an element of self-
thinking has been achieved in as much as UAVs are able to react to threats, for example, 
when attacked by an air-defence missile. 
 
UAVs and UCAVs are themselves just ‘aircraft’ with onboard systems. However, they are 
usually linked to additional equipment outside, such as the remote-control and launching 
equipment. In addition, UAVs often have an interchangeable ‘mission package’, which includes 
the sensors and, if necessary, the link for transferring data collected by the sensors. Together, 
this equipment forms the UAV system7, the main components of which are listed in Appendix 
II. 
 
2.3 UCAV 
 
A UCAV is a sub-category of UAVs. It is basically nothing more than an armed UAV. The 
border between UAV and UCAV is a thin and grey one. Generally, all UAVs have an inherent 
combat capacity – one just has to replace a non-deadly payload with a deadly one. The US 
Predator was modified from a reconnaissance UAV to a UCAV by simply adding Hellfire 
                                                 
6 The Military Balance 2006, IISS, p. 20-22 and p. 26 (Routledge, UK, May 2006). 
7 The US uses the term UAS – Unmanned Air System – for the complete package, reserving UAV for the airborne 
component, the ‘aircraft’, itself. 
 
 
 
3

[Page 8 / 28 | chars: 4045]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

missiles. UCAVs have evolved, experimentally, when normal aircraft have been modified to 
operate without a pilot. Iraq is reported to have modified L-29 trainer aircraft into remote-
controlled chemical weapon sprayers.  
 
The term UCAV, however, is generally used for a high-performance vehicle, capable of high 
speed, long range and heavy weapon load – more or less the equivalent of a manned ground-
attack or bomber aircraft. The armed Predator, therefore, would not really count as a UCAV, 
while the Iraqi L-29 modification would be a borderline case.  
 
The first successful use of armed UAVs in combat operations was the attacks carried out by the 
US against ‘terrorist’ targets in Yemen and Afghanistan in 2002 and 2003. These attacks were 
carried out with Predator (MQ-9)8 reconnaissance UAVs modified to carry one or two Hellfire 
missiles9. The use of armed UAVs resulted from the failure of the US to ‘take out’ terrorists, 
and specifically Osama bin Laden, with cruise missiles. While the cruise missiles worked more 
or less as advertised, the time lag between identifying a mobile target such as Bin Laden and the 
actual impact of the missiles was too great.  
 
Ruling out the use of manned reconnaissance and attack systems, the only solution was to 
combine the detection and surveillance capabilities of a UAV with a weapon. This could either 
be done by relaying surveillance data to a platform carrying weapons or by adding weapons to 
the surveillance system. The first option has already been used by Israel in actions against 
targets in Gaza and Lebanon: UAVs would patrol and identify targets and manned aircraft 
would fire stand-off guided missiles to attack the target. Since the platform (usually an aircraft) 
carrying the missile was further away from the target than the UAV, there still remained a gap 
between target identification and the missile hitting. It also meant that a manned platform would 
have to be within missile range of the target. 
 
The US, however, chose to arm the UAV itself, thereby further closing the gap between target 
identification and a missile hitting it, and providing the option to do all this from a distance of up 
to several hundred kilometres. Adapting a rather large UAV, such as the Predator, to carry a 
light armament did not prove too difficult. The Predator was modified, tested and brought into 
action within months. It gave the US new options to identify and attack time-sensitive targets 
without having to risk manned aircraft over ‘enemy’ territory or in politically sensitive airspace. 
The armed Predator proved so successful that a new version was ordered almost at once. This 
much improved version - Predator-B (MQ-9B) - is now being acquired, capable of carrying up 
to 450 kg of missiles or bombs as well as air-to-air missiles to defend itself against interception. 
This new Predator has an endurance of almost two days. 
 
2.4 Risks of using UAVs 
 
The obvious advantage of the UAV – the fact that it does not require a human to fly over 
dangerous ‘enemy’ territory, can easily become a liability if this tempts the owner to intrude into 
the airspace of another country without permission. Such action could easily trigger conflict. 
Both Pakistan and India use UAVs along their mutual border and in 2002 violated each other’s 
airspace several times, while tension was already high. UCAVs add an extra dimension to this 
                                                 
8 US systems often have a commercial or military name, such as Predator or Shadow-600, as well as a military 
designation, such as MQ-9 or RQ-7. This paper uses the name, giving the military designation in brackets when 
first used. 
9 The US Hellfire is a laser- or radar-guided anti-tank missile developed for use from helicopters. It weighs some 45 
kg and has a range of some 5-8 km. The Hellfire is used by several EU members, and similar missiles such as Spike, 
Trigat or Brimstone are in use or being developed by EU members and could be used to arm UAVs. 
 
4

[Page 9 / 28 | chars: 3819]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

risk – they may be seen as an excellent method for safe and deniable covert method for targeted 
attacks on high level ‘enemies’. The use of armed UAVs by the US to assassinate suspected 
terrorist leaders, even in non-combat areas (e.g. the attack in Yemen) has already raised moral 
and legal questions. 
 
A second important risk - a lesson learned from UAV use in the Balkans, Iraq and Afghanistan - 
is the danger of micro-management of combat operations by commanders (both military and 
political) who are stationed away from the combat zone10. Instead of letting their operational 
and tactical commanders ‘get on’ with the action, top level commanders may now be tempted to 
think that UAVs and other information gathering systems such as satellites give them the ability 
to see what is going on in the zone of operations in real time. This may then encourage them to 
try and micro-command the operation, and lead to rules of engagement that always demand 
authorization from top level commanders, thereby curtailing the decision-making powers of the 
lower level commanders. Extensive use of UAVs demands clear doctrines on who is in charge 
of which levels of operation. 
 
Thirdly, while UAVs are extremely useful, their often slow speed (most have a maximum speed 
of less than 300km/hour) leaves them vulnerable to enemy action and other attrition11. The 
development of faster UAVs, capable of using defensive measures such as flares, will help to 
overcome their vulnerability, while the acquisition of larger numbers of UAVs will alleviate the 
attrition problem.  
 
Lastly, photographs or video images gathered by UAVs for use as evidence in formal legal 
proceedings (as one might expect in peacekeeping operations) is questionable. This point was 
made by British officers with experience in Northern Ireland and Kosovo. They maintained that 
while the UAV imagery was good enough for use in war, it would probably not stand up in court 
– unlike imagery derived from heavier but better equipment mounted on manned helicopters12. 
 
 
3. History of European UAVs 
 
Until the 1960s UAVs were limited in their operations to either pre-programmed flight or to 
remote radio control. The first option enabled long-range operations, but no flexibility once the 
UAV was launched, whereas the second option gave flexibility, but severely restricted the range 
because the controller needed to see the UAV he was steering. In the 1960s developments in 
data transmission and in electronic miniaturization opened the way for reliable and small sensors 
to provide live data of sufficient quality to give operators on the ground a chance to see what the 
UAV’s sensors were seeing and thus to steer the UAV based on these pictures. 
 
                                                 
10 Ripley, T., ‘UAVs over Kosovo – did the earth move?’, Defence Systems Daily, 1 Dec. 1999, URL http://defence-
data.com/features/fpage34.htm; Biass, E. and Braybrook, R., ‘The UAV as sensor platform – from Pioneer to 
Global Hawk’, Armada International, Oct/Nov. 2001, p. 3. 
11 During the 1999 operations in Kosovo, at least 21 and possibly over 27 Allied UAVs were lost. The Canadians 
had all their four Sperwers out of action within a few weeks of the start of their operations in Afghanistan. Of some 
30 Pioneer UAVs used by the US forces in the 1990-1991 Gulf War, 13 were out of action by the end of he short 
war, while 13 had been temporarily out of action due to damage, leaving US forces with a very limited UAV force. 
Biass, E. and Braybrook, R., ‘The UAV as sensor platform – from Pioneer to Global Hawk’, Armada International, 
Oct/Nov. 2001, pp. 2-3. 
12 Ripley, T., ‘UAVs over Kosovo – did the earth move?’, Defence Systems Daily, 1 Dec. 1999, URL http://defence-
data.com/features/fpage34.htm. 
 
5

[Page 10 / 28 | chars: 3599]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The very first UAV used by a European country was the US MQM-57 used by the UK from the 
late-1950s13. This crude UAV was replaced in the early 1970s by the Canadian CL-89, which 
also entered service with France, Germany and Italy. Other current EU Member States have 
been using UAVs on a limited scale. But it was not until the 1990s that European countries first 
used UAVs in a war zone14, or that most other European countries introduced UAVs. Today, the 
armed forces of almost all of them operate UAVs.  
 
Indeed, the use of UAVs is spreading around the world. They are being deployed even by 
developing countries like the Philippines (which bought UAVs from Israel in 2001 for use 
against rebel groups) and Nigeria (which bought them in 2006 for patrolling the Niger Delta).  
 
Today, UAVs range from extremely simple, short-range 'vehicles' for battlefield use, to multi-
million dollar 'aircraft' with almost global reach. However, except in respect of the really long-
range UAVs, it is not so much the UAV itself that is important, but the payload and the ground 
station capacities to process and disseminate data. Simple UAVs generally carry little more than 
a video camera that sends images over limited distances to a ground station that has limited links 
to other units. Larger UAVs can carry larger or different types of camera, while electronic 
intelligence systems (ELINT) and ground-surveillance radars are becoming common too. The 
ground stations are linked into a larger and faster network. 
 
The advantage of UAVs for reconnaissance is obvious: low cost, low visibility and unmanned. 
Most countries can easily afford them, while the loss of one does not cost much and leaves no 
pilot to be rescued. Especially against unconventional enemies such as rebel, terrorist and 
criminal groups, or when used in 'undeclared' wars (e.g. Israeli use of UAVs over Lebanon) the 
unmanned aspect of UAVs is a clear advantage. The fact that the vehicle does not need to 
accommodate a pilot makes it possible to keep it small, providing low visibility and enabling a 
stealthy approach. This means that a target is often unaware of being observed by the UAV (as 
often happened vis-à-vis Israeli UAVs over Lebanon).  
 
 
4. Current UAV/UCAV developments in the EU 
 
4.1 UAV acquisition and requirements 
 
Most EU members have either acquired or will soon acquire UAVs (see Table 1 for a 
comprehensive list). However, the combined EU efforts are small compared to the US 
acquisitions. As noted earlier, in three years (US Fiscal Years 2004, 2005 and 2006) the US 
bought 295 UAVs15. In the same period EU members bought less then 100. Budget-wise one 
can compare the US expenditure of US$2.66bn in just those three years, with the fact that the 
full UK Watchkeeper UAV programme, which covers most of UK UAV acquisitions for the 
coming decade, will cost about half of that expenditure. 
                                                
 
The most urgent requirements are for tactical, MALE and HALE long-range UAVs. 
Interestingly there seems to be less interest in mini- and micro-UAVs, despite the fact that 
several EU members are involved in conflicts where the US found a strong need for such 
systems. 
 
13 The MQM-57 was the first US UAV. 
14 The first operational use of a European UAV took place during the 1990-1991 Gulf War, when British forces 
used the CL-89, almost 20 years after it was first introduced in service. URL < http://www.sfu.ca/casr/bg-uav-
history.htm>. 
15 The Military Balance 2006, IISS, p. 20-22 and p. 26 (Routledge, UK, May 2006). 
 
6

[Page 11 / 28 | chars: 3999]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Many UAVs planned or in service with EU Member States are not of EU origin, even in those 
states that have an indigenous industry capable of producing them. The strong position of Israeli 
companies in developing UAVs is obvious. Although they provide many of the UAVs ordered 
by EU states, often these are ‘disguised’ as a European product, produced at least nominally by a 
European company. Frequently, the systems are given different designations to further hide their 
origin. For example, in 1998, Belgium ordered three B-Hunter UAV systems with 18 UAVs. 
They were produced by a consortium specifically set up for the production – Eagle, owned 50 
per cent by Sonaca (Belgium), 25 per cent by Thales-Belgium (Belgium) and 25 per cent by IAI 
(Israel)16. It is interesting to note is that only two other UAVs competed for the order: the 
French Sperwer and the Swiss Ranger. The latter is reality is another Israeli UAV produced by a 
European company17. 
 
The strong position of the two main Israeli UAV producers, IAI and Elbit, is also reflected in the 
fact that the UK selected the Elbit Hermes-450 UAV for its Watchkeeper programme (and 
renaming it Hermes, WK-450), and from the fact that France bought  Heron UAVs from IAI as 
an ‘interim’ solution for its MALE programme (and renaming Heron, Eagle). The Eagle will be 
used by EADS reconnaissance systems18. France requires up to 24 MALE UAVs and is most 
likely to order Eagle-2 UAVs, developed by IAI and EADS from the Eagle-1, which probably 
means that IAI will deliver a version of its Heron-2 UAV fitted with EADS sensors. 
 
US producers are also major suppliers to EU countries. While some of the supplies are related to 
military aid programmes (Poland’s acquisition of US UAVs is financed by US aid), US 
producers have strong products in the large Predator MALE and Global Hawk HALE UAVs. 
European industry has yet to develop such systems. 
 
Among the biggest UAV programme ongoing in the EU is the NATO Alliance Ground 
Surveillance (AGS) programme. This programme, worth over €3Bn, envisages NATO’s 
acquisition of a long-range airborne ground-surveillance capability based on four large aircraft 
and four RQ-4B Global Hawk UAVs19. The most important aspects of the NATO AGS here are: 
(i) the fact that the AGS will be NATO controlled and thereby will provide EU countries some 
access to long-range UAVs; (ii) the fact that there was no alternative for the US-produced RQ-4; 
and (iii) that the cost for the advanced and high-performance ground surveillance radar would be 
around €200m each. 
 
Germany also wants the Global Hawk, but in a SIGINT role – a version called Euro Hawk – 
carrying a European sensor package consisting of COMINT and ELINT equipment (produced 
respectively by Rohde & Schwarz and by EADS). Germany plans to buy 4-6 UAVs for around 
€600m to replace manned long-range Atlantic SIGINT aircraft20. There is a possibility of a 
second order for Euro Hawk UAVs equipped with radar for ground surveillance21. 
 
                                                 
16 AirForces Monthly, October 2001; Air & Cosmos, 31 August 2001. 
17 Jane’s Defence Weekly, 23 December 1998. Finland bought the Ranger in 1999 via the Swiss company RUAG. 
Biass, E. and Braybrook, R., ‘The UAV as sensor platform – from Pioneer to Global Hawk’, Armada International, 
Oct/Nov. 2001, p. 7. 
18 The French Heron/Eagle acquistion is called SIDM – Système Intermédiare de Drones Male and is channelled 
through EADS. AirForces Monthly, Nov. 2006, p. 10; Air & Cosmos, 16 Sep. 2005, p. 8. 
19 For more on the AGS see the NATO website, URL < http://www.nato.int/issues/ags/index.html>. The original 
plan foresaw equipping the aircraft and the UAV with a ground-surveillance radar, but by mid-2006 the radar for 
the UAVs was cancelled to save €800m, Jane’s Defence Weekly, 16 Aug. 2006, p. 7. 
20 Air & Cosmos, 28 Oct. 2005, p. 33; Soldat und Technik, July 2004, p. 33.  
21 AirForces Monthly, July 2004, p. 11. 
 
7

[Page 12 / 28 | chars: 3762]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.2 European UAV research and development 
 
Research and development (R&D) in EU member states is focused on medium-sized and larger 
UAVs and their sensors, as well as on UCAVs. A large part of the UAV R&D is financed by 
private industry and invariably uses existing technology (including civilian technology) for both 
the UAV aircraft and the sensors. The UAV programmes are generally aimed at producing 
operational systems. The more complex and expensive UCAV programmes are more dependent 
on financing by governments. All current UCAV programmes are technology demonstrator 
programmes aimed at testing instead of producing an operational UCAV. 
 
Research on tactical, mini, micro and super-micro UAVs is ongoing in many places inside EU 
countries. These range from government-owned research organisations to practical student and 
private ventures22. Cooperation between different companies or countries in the EU is not very 
strong. The experience of Eurodrone - a 1980 joint venture between Matra (France) and STN 
Atlas (Germany) to develop a small tactical UAV (called Brevel or KZO) - seems to sum it all 
up: brought as a typical French-German cooperative effort, it collapsed when the French pulled 
out of the project claiming the system was no longer useful, while the Germans went on and 
finally after 25 years introduced their KZO UAV in 2005. 
 
Several MALE UAV systems are being developed by European companies. Two of these are 
pure European efforts. BAE (UK) is developing the Herti-1A MALE based on a Polish powered 
glider airframe. Dassault (France), Alenia (Italy) and Saab (Sweden) agreed in June 2007 to 
develop a MALE, based on expertise gained from the Neuron project and probably absorbing 
Alenia’s own Sky-Y MALE technology demonstrator programme. Other European partners are 
planned and while it is a company initiative, funding from EU governments is sought23. It is 
interesting that the new Dassault/Alenia/Saab programme seems to contradict a 2004 Dassault-
EADS agreement whereby Dassault would take responsibility for UCAV and EADS for MALE 
development24. Other programmes are based on Israeli or US technology with different degrees 
of European input: the French Eagle and the British Watchkeeper programmes use Israeli UAV 
aircraft with locally-developed payloads; the RQ-1 is assembled in Italy and carries a US-
produced payload. 
 
Most recent are EU efforts to develop a HALE UAV. EADS initiated development of an 
Advanced UAV in 2005 with support from France and Germany, and in 2007 Spain joined the 
project. A formal development contract, which includes Thales and Indra, is expected soon and 
the project is open for additional industrial or country participants25. 
 
 
 
 
 
                                                 
22 E.g. in 2005 students at the University of Delft (Netherlands) developed a 17 gr super micro UAV called Delfly. 
URL http://www.flightglobal.com/articles/2005/09/13/201479/dutch-micro-uav-flaps-its-way-to-successful-first-
flight.html. Such micro and mini UAV are not much different from remote-controlled ‘toy’ aircraft commonly 
available in almost any toyshop for less than €50. 
23 Alenia is a subsidiary of Finmeccanica (Italy). Dassault press release, 19 June 2007, URL < http://www.dassault-
aviation.com/fr/aviation/presse/press-kits/2007/european-male-agreement.html>.  
24 US Department of Commerce, ‘France to lead UAV development in Europe’, STAT-USA 15 July 2004, URL 
http://strategis.ic.gc.ca/epic/site/imr-ri.nsf/en/gr125937e.html. 
25 ‘Spain signs up for EADS-led Advanced UAV study’, Flight International, 31 July 2007, URL 
http://www.flightglobal.com/articles/2005/09/13/201479/dutch-micro-uav-flaps-its-way-to-successful-first-
flight.html. 
 
8

[Page 13 / 28 | chars: 4538]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.3 European UCAV research and development 
 
Currently, there are no UCAVs (including armed UAVs) either in service or in production in EU 
countries26. However, there is an interest to acquire armed UAVs rather soon. The UK has 
shown interest in the US Predator-B armed UAV, which is currently operating in Iraq and 
Afghanistan (reportedly with some UK personnel involved). The only EU-developed armed 
UAV currently under consideration is a French feasibility study ordered from Sagem for an 
armed version of the Sperwer-B UAV27. Plans for acquisitions of real UCAVs are still very 
vague. EU armed forces are not yet clear if and how such real UCAVs fit into their national 
doctrines. However, several EU governments are sponsoring technology demonstrator 
programmes to develop the UCAV concept into a working system. All current UCAV 
programmes are technology demonstrator programmes aimed at testing – rather than producing - 
an operational UCAV. Different from UAV programmes, the more complex and expensive 
UCAV programmes are dependent on financing by governments.  
 
There are now several separate ongoing UCAV R&D programmes. France, Italy, Spain, 
Sweden, Greece, (Belgium may join) and non-EU Switzerland are working on the Neuron 
project: a mainly a French initiative that includes a mix of government and industry funding. 
The French company Dassault leads the project28, but non-French expertise has been sought 
from the start. The French government has budgeted €300m for the programme. Finmeccanica’s 
subsidiary Alenia is the largest non-French industrial partner and Memoranda of Understanding 
were signed at the end of 2005 with Sweden (for €75m, including €15m from Saab) and Spain 
(€35.5 million) for the period 2007-201229. The Neuron is a technology demonstrator and 
should fly around 201030. Its aim is to test concept and technologies for operational UCAVs that 
may replace the current generation of manned combat aircraft by around 2025-203
31
0 . 
                                                
 
The UK has launched two programmes, Taranis and Corax (Raven). BAe Systems, which has 
financed UAV/UCAV development for the past decade, has been appointed to lead a UK 
industrial team for the UK-government funded £124m (€185m) Taranis development in 2006. 
Taranis is a long range UCAV, the size of a small combat aircraft, powered by a full size 
turbofan and will have intercontinental range32. Taranis builds on the experiences of the BAe-
developed Kestrel and Corax UAVs. Currently, Taranis is designated a demonstrator 
 
26 Spain is reported to have acquired the Harpy, a ‘lethal drone’ produced by IAI. While very much like a UAV 
(including the fact that it looks like one, is slow and is designed to loiter for hours before attacking), it is a one-way 
system and therefore classified here as a missile. Rheinmetall is developing the similar Taifun. 
27 The Sperwer-B is an enlarged version of the Sperwer, but would not be able to carry an armament heavier than 
two small missiles. ‘Enhanced Sperwer B with new operational capabilities’, Asian Defence Journal, July-August 
2006, p.54. Rheinmetall (Germany) has developed the Taifun and TARES, which they label as ‘combat UAV’. 
These operate as normal UAVs but can be also be used to attack targets in a ‘suicide’ mission. They do not carry 
any armament. ‘Taifun attack drone’, Defence Update, Vol. 2, 2005, URL http://www.defense-
update.com/products/t/taifun.htm, and Rheinmetall website, URL http://www.rheinmetall-
detec.de/index.php?fid=1600&lang=3&pdb=1 
28 Dassault has developed several UAV technology demonstrators (Petit Duc, Moyen Duc, Grand Duc, AVE). 
Biass, E. and Braybrook, R., ‘The UAV as sensor platform – from Pioneer to Global Hawk’, Armada International, 
Oct/Nov. 2001, p. 3. 
29 Officially the name is nEUROn. Alenia website, URL < http://www.alenia-aeronautica.it/Products/neuron.asp>; 
US Department of Commerce, ‘France to lead UAV development in Europe’, STAT-USA 15 July 2004, URL 
http://strategis.ic.gc.ca/epic/site/imr-ri.nsf/en/gr125937e.html; ‘Madrid dans l’UCAV’, Air & Cosmos, 6 January 
2006, p.24. 
30 Aviation Week & Space Technology, 26 Sep. 2005, p. 13. 
31 US Department of Commerce, ‘France to lead UAV development in Europe’, STAT-USA 15 July 2004, URL 
http://strategis.ic.gc.ca/epic/site/imr-ri.nsf/en/gr125937e.html. 
32 ‘Taranis unmanned combat air vehicle (UCAV) demonstrator, United Kingdom’, Air Force Technology, URL 
http://www.airforce-technology.com/projects/tanaris/. 
 
9

[Page 14 / 28 | chars: 3725]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

programme, meant to develop a working UCAV, but not necessarily an operational system. 
Corax is basically a high-end UAV development, using stealth technologies, under development 
since 2003 and unveiled in 2006. The aircraft is large enough to function as a UCAV. A third 
programme in which UK with industry involvement is the X-48B, a reduced-size prototype has 
been built by Cranfield Aerospace for the US company Boeing33. 
 
Germany cooperates with Spain in the development of the Barracuda, another UAV programme 
with possibilities to grow into a UCAV. About the same size as the Taranis, the Barracuda flew 
first in 2006 and is also meant as a technology demonstrator. Originally envisaged to develop 
technologies for a long-range reconnaissance UAV - intended to replace the manned Tornado 
aircraft in reconnaissance tasks - it is now also intended to demonstrate armed combat 
capabilities. EADS leads the development programme, which is funded by the German and 
Spanish governments. In Italy, Finmeccanica’s Alenia has been working on a technology 
demonstrator called Sky-X, which first flew in 2005 as the first European UAV with a weight of 
over 1,000 kg34. 
 
It is clear that UCAVs will not replace manned aircraft in all or even many tasks, not even for 
some of the most hazardous missions where the loss of aircraft and pilots is likely35. However, 
in some instances UCAVs will be able to offer unmanned alternatives for dangerous missions; 
often in conjunction with manned aircraft. As yet the roles for the UCAV in Europe are 
undefined, but are likely to be the basis of future SEAD (Suppression of Enemy Air Defences) 
forces – attacking enemy radar and air-defence systems, currently one of the most risky tasks for 
manned combat aircraft36. 
 
The one task where UCAVs offer a clear advantage is for covert combat missions, where 
‘deniability’ is a priority: something rendered impossible if and when pilots are lost over 
‘enemy’ territory. The downside is the possibility that having an improved option for conducting 
deniable covert operations may lower the threshold for carrying them out. 
 
 
5. The role of the EU on the global UAV/UCAV market 
 
The global market for UAVs has grown dramatically in the last 10 years and is expected to 
maintain high growth rates in the coming decade when existing possessors expand their use of 
UAVs and when more countries acquire them. This opens up possibilities for EU producers to 
improve on their previously poor track record and export their products to non-EU countries. As 
Figure 2 shows (below), only a small proportion of global UAV acquisitions from foreign 
sources in the last 10 years concerns EU producers exporting to non-EU countries. An estimate 
for 2006 gave EU producers only a four per cent share of the global market, almost all from 
national or intra-EU sales. Most of the global export market is covered by the US (in 2006, US 
producers accounted for some 60 per cent of the total global market - including the huge US 
market37) and Israel (IAI’s MALAT division pronounces that it ‘leads the market in UAV  
 
 
                                                 
33 NASA website, 4 May 2006, URL http://www.nasa.gov/vision/earth/improvingflight/x48b.html. 
34 Alenia website, URL < http://www.alenia-aeronautica.it/Products/sky-x.asp>. 
35 The end of manned combat aircraft has been predicted in the 1950s, 1960, 1970s and 1980s and has then been 
proven very premature. 
36 Streetly, M., ‘Disrupt, disable, destroy’ (Briefing: Suppression of enemy air defences), Jane’s Defence Weekly, 
14 December 2005, pp. 24-29. 
37 Dickerson, L., ‘UAVs on the rise’, Aviation Week & Space Technology, 15 January 2007. 
 
10

[Page 15 / 28 | chars: 2758]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Figure 1: Global exports of UAV 1997-2006
Figures are number of units (regardless of size, performance or price; excepting micro and 
mini UAV) 
0
10
20
30
40
50
60
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
2003
2004
2005
2006
Others
Israel
USA
EU
 
 
 
 
experience, technology and reliability’, and has over 29 customers38). No EU producer can 
claim experiences or success that comes close to that. 
                                                
 
Despite this extremely strong position of three US (General Atomics, AAI and Northrop 
Grumman) and three Israeli companies (IAI, Elbit and Aerostar), the low end of the UAV 
market is highly competitive. No less than 42 bids were received by Indonesia in 2006 for a 
small (less than US$10m) order for a tactical UAV39. Most of the demand in markets where 
international competition is possible (the US market is almost closed for non-US producers) is 
for tactical and MALE UAVs. The demand for the expensive and technically complicated 
HALEs derives from some well-developed large, rich countries that either have extensive 
maritime patrol needs or enjoy ‘regional power’ status, such as Australia, Japan, Turkey and 
India.  
 
As one of the first non-UAV producers, India has developed as a major market for UAVs since 
the mid-1990s, ordering TUAVs and MALE USVs worth up to $1bn from Israel and planning 
more. Several other Asian countries (Australia, South Korea, Singapore, Thailand, Indonesia) 
are following suit, with other Asian countries expected to follow soon. Almost without 
exception, Israeli and US designs have won all competitions in this region, invariably because 
they were technically superior. 
 
Another future market, and one where Israeli companies are not welcome, is the Middle East. 
While several Middle Eastern countries have used UAVs for years (e.g. Saudi Arabia has used 
small and simple UAVs for border surveillance), very few have yet ordered tactical or larger 
military UAVs. In the years ahead, countries in this volatile region can be expected to spend 
more on different reconnaissance and intelligence systems, including UAVs. 
 
African and Latin American countries may also become more interested in UAVs. While their 
markets are not large, many countries here have large territories and long borders to control; and 
several are experiencing ongoing internal conflicts. UAVs could provide an inexpensive 
alternative to manned aircraft. For example, UAVs could assume some of the roles of maritime 
patrol aircraft, which are expensive to buy and to operate (too expensive for many developing 
 
38 IAI website, URL <http://www.iai.co.il/Default.aspx?FolderID=17802&lang=en>. 
39 The IAI (Israel) Searcher-2 was selected. Air Letter, 6 November 2006, p. 4. 
 
11

[Page 16 / 28 | chars: 3915]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

countries), many of which have extensive EEZs40 to patrol (Nigeria is one of the first countries 
adopting UAVs for maritime patrol)41. UAVs have also already found use with some developing 
countries for surveillance missions against rebel forces (e.g. in Sri Lanka, Angola and the 
Philippines). 
 
An interesting development is the use of UAVs by government agencies other than the military 
and by civilian users. Here large UAVs are seen as useful for SAR, surveillance of large areas 
(e.g. forests or fishing grounds), and geographic and geological survey. Smaller, ‘tactical’ or 
mini UAVs could well be practical for police forces for area surveillance (e.g. for traffic 
control), while even the smallest UAVs are already being offered for small scale agricultural 
use, for example42. 
 
All analysts agree the UAV market will still see strong growth in the coming decade. 
Information from open sources on planned acquisitions globally indicates that most countries 
currently possessing UAVs will expand their inventory and/or improve sensors on their UAVs. 
In addition, many new military users of UAVs will emerge. Some predictions have been made 
about the size of the future global UAV market (for example, one estimate suggests that the 
market will be worth about US$13.5bn43 between 2005 and 2014: another suggests 
US$17.5bn44 between 2003 and 2012), although it is impossible to judge how good these 
stimates are.  
exports, therefore, US producers already have up to 50 per cent of the global market 
overed45.  
 market segment where they could 
ompete with UAVs and UCAVs was worth some US$3bn46. 
                                                
e
 
Where open sources provide information about those UAV procurement plans under 
consideration, it is clear that very few EU companies are involved in the competition. A large 
part of the expected market is in the US, where EU UAVs have little chance of competing on 
even terms. The value of expected US orders for Global Hawk UAV by 2014 is already 
US$3.5bn (or 25 per cent of the total estimated value of the global UAV market). Without 
resorting to 
c
 
Another important part of the future market is already locked, with programmes such as the UK 
Watchkeeper or the NATO AGS having already been selected but not yet ordered or delivered. 
Most procurement globally in the next 10 years seems likely to be filled mainly by Israeli and 
US companies. In 2004 Dassault and EADS suggested that the
c
 
The market specific to UCAVs is currently less clear, partly because UCAVs are such a new 
concept. A tentative estimate of some US$7.5bn has been given as the value of the UCAV 
market between 2003 and 201247. Export of UCAVs (excluding armed UAVs) is not foreseen in 
 
40 Under the law of the sea, an Exclusive Economic Zone (EEZ) is a sea zone over which a state has special rights 
over the exploration and use of marine resources. 
41 In 2006 Nigeria bought Israeli UAVs and Unmanned Surface Vehicles (USV – remote controlled boats). 
42 See for example the Canadian company CropCam, which offers a 3 kg camera-equipped micro UAV to ‘patrol’ 
farms. CropCam website, URL < http://cropcam.com/>.  
43 ‘UAV market to top $13 billion by 2014’, Forecast International press release, 21 Oct. 2005. 
44 Frost & Sullivan quoted in US Department of Commerce report dated early 2005, URL 
http://commercecan.ic.gc.ca/scdt/bizmap/interface2.nsf/vDownload/ISA_1593/$file/X_2891343.PDF. 
45 ‘UAV market to top $13 billion by 2014’, Forecast International press release, 21 Oct. 2005. 
46 US Department of Commerce, ‘France to lead UAV development in Europe’, STAT-USA 15 July 2004, URL 
http://strategis.ic.gc.ca/epic/site/imr-ri.nsf/en/gr125937e.html 
47 Frost & Sullivan quoted in US Department of Commerce report dated early 2005, URL 
http://commercecan.ic.gc.ca/scdt/bizmap/interface2.nsf/vDownload/ISA_1593/$file/X_2891343.PDF 
 
12

[Page 17 / 28 | chars: 3921]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

the coming decade. Very few countries outside the US and the EU have current plans for 
nal experience has not been the most rewarding. Denmark has now withdrawn the 
ystem because of technical shortcomings and The Netherlands may soon look for a replacement 
. Unlike the US, Israel has successfully used industrial cooperation and 
chnology transfers as a pillar of its UAV exports and EU countries may want to follow a 
ad of at least 500 kg over a range of at 
ast 300 km. The MTCR also limits the possibility of exporting UAVs and UCAVs with ranges 
ed in R&D and local 
roduction using some imported technology. This could result in a proliferation of independent 
access to technology may have less chance to market their products. At the same time, 
                                                
(possible) acquisition. 
 
The most successful European UAV on the export market is the Sperwer. This was exported to 
Canada as a ‘stopgap’ order for immediate use in Afghanistan, and is also used by several EU 
member states. However, the system is already beginning to become outdated and the 
operatio
s
too48.  
 
Surprisingly, a small company in Austria, Siebel, may be the most successful exporter of UAVs 
in the near future. In the spring of 2006 Siebel sold no less then 80 Camcopter S-100 UAVs to 
the United Arab Emirates (UAE), after earlier gaining a small order from Egypt and the interest 
of the US Navy and Coast Guard. While several other EU and US designs are offered for export 
or being developed, this sale is significant because the Camcopter is basically the first sale of 
any helicopter-type UAV capable of VTOL operations. It also shows how successful UAV 
technology does not necessarily come from a larger company with extensive financial and 
technical resources. The involvement of the emerging UAE arms industry in the deal is also 
significant – some parts of the Camcopter will be produced by the UAE Research and 
Technology Centre49
te
similar approach.  
 
One important consideration for any future export of UAVs and UCAVs is the fact that such 
systems – if their payloads and ranges were of sufficient magnitude - would fall within the 
restrictions imposed by the Missile Technology Control Regime (MTCR). This basically bans 
exports of complete unmanned airborne systems that could be used as delivery systems for 
Weapons of Mass Destruction (WMD) - specifically including UAVs and UCAVs and their 
technology - if the aircraft is capable of carrying a paylo
le
of 300 km or more regardless of the payload capacity50.  
 
Another area of concern is protection of technology. Several countries planning UAVs seem to 
regard the ‘newness’ of these systems as an opening to get involv
p
UAV producers, whose use and misuse of UAVs cannot be controlled.  
 
A third important consideration is, as with all arms acquisition, the dependence on a supplier. 
This has already been mentioned as an issue for EU countries acquiring UAVs, but for countries 
with less strong, stable and mutually dependent relations with suppliers of either UAVs or 
mission equipment, the issue of dependency plays even stronger – certainly for some of the 
bigger countries like India. Such dependency is often only acceptable when the supplier is 
reliable and able and willing to support the exported UAV over the many years of its life. This 
has implications for potential exports: countries with a record of imposing ‘embargoes’ or 
limiting 
 
48 Note on Denmark; ‘Netherlands prepares for small and mini UAV competitions, flags Sperwer upgrade’, Flight 
International, 11 Sep. 2006, URL http://www.flightglobal.com/articles/2006/09/11/208930/netherlands-prepares-
for-small-and-mini-uav-competitions-flags-sperwer.html. 
49 Jane’s Defence Weekly, 26 Apr. 2006, p. 17. 
50 For more on the MTCR, see the SIPRI website, URL 
<http://www.sipri.org/contents/expcon/mtcr_documents.html>. 
 
13

[Page 18 / 28 | chars: 3527]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

pressure for exports may limit a country’s options to impose embargoes or limit technology 
nly complete UAVs can cause problems: the associated technology for remote-
ontrol beyond the line of sight can also be used to modify normal aircraft into precision-guided 
arded against more conventional forms of attack, such as specific 
arts of) government buildings, targets deep inside a military installation or other sensitive 
00 UAVs 
upplied by Italy into cruise missiles and, as mentioned earlier, modified L-29 jet trainer aircraft 
UAVs and true UCAVs would exceed the 
mits of the MTCR agreement , which means that large parts of the world (e.g. Middle East) 
re basically off-limits for UAV and UCAV exports. 
 
 
                                                
access. 
 
5.1 Risks of UAV exports 
 
The dangers of exporting UAVs, capable of delivering stand-off weapons or even WMD, are 
obvious. With UAVs proliferating, it is probably only a matter of time before dangerous 
governments or terrorists get their hands on them and use them51. Such fears gained strength 
after the discovery of Iraqi programmes to develop UAVs to deliver biological or chemical 
weapons, and to modify them as cruise missiles with high explosive payloads. For instance, 
Hezbollah used UAVs (supplied by Iran) in its 2006 war with Israel. At least three were 
reportedly fitted with a limited (10-50kg) payload of explosives and used as crude cruise 
missiles52. Not o
c
cruise missiles. 
 
Questions remain as to why terrorists would want to acquire and use UAVs when they have 
many, much easier, means available. The only advantage for terrorists of a UAV modified to a 
precision-guided weapon would be when very specific small objects are targeted - sensitive 
targets normally heavily gu
(p
places, or a moving target. 
 
UAVs or UAV technology in the hands of dangerous governments is probably of greater 
concern. Unarmed UAVs are easily modified through the simple addition of an explosive 
payload. The result is an inexpensive cruise missile, which, while slow, is also accurate and 
stealthy. And although they are only able to deliver very limited payloads, this could be a 
chemical or biological one. Alternatively the control system for a UAV can be used to modify 
normal aircraft into remote-controlled cruise missiles, capable of carrying a much heavier 
weapon load. For instance, in the 1980s and 1990s Iraq reportedly modified Mirach-6
s
into remote-controlled UAVs for possible use with biological or chemical weapons53. 
 
The risks UAVs and UCAVs and their technologies pose vis-à-vis WMD proliferation is 
recognized internationally. These systems and their associated technologies are covered by the 
MTCR, to which most EU members are party. Large 
54
li
a
 
51 See for example: Gormley, D. M., ‘New developments in unmanned air vehicles and land-attack cruise missiles’, 
SIPRI Yearbook 2003 (Oxford University Press, Oxford, UK, 2003), pp. 409-432. 
52 None reached their target – two were intercepted and shot down by the Israeli air defences and the third exploded 
on launch. Wezeman, Siemon T. et al, ‘International arms transfers’, SIPRI Yearbook 2007, (Oxford University 
Press, Oxford, UK, 2007), p. 411. 
53 Gormley, op. cit., pp. 413-414. 
54 The MTCR limits were until 2002 for example an issue for US export permits for the Predator UAV to European 
countries. The Predator has a range exceeding the MTCR limits, but its payload is less than the MTCR limit. 
Defense News, 15 Apr. 2002. 
 
14

[Page 19 / 28 | chars: 2894]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

6. Conclusion  
 
For many countries, UAVs have become important force multipliers. They have gained a 
permanent place in the military force structure, mainly for reconnaissance purposes: a role of 
increasing importance. Not only is reconnaissance once more seen as a sine qua non for the type 
of military operations most forces plan for today, but unmanned aircraft are starting to fulfill 
other roles, including combat roles. 
 
Most EU members have acquired UAVs or plan to do so soon. Several of them have used UAVs 
in combat operations since the end of the Cold War, finding them especially useful in the type of 
military operations envisaged in the ESDP. However, the acquisition of UAVs in the EU is 
generally based on national decisions and often not very coordinated on the EU level. While it is 
difficult to see if, in order to fulfill ESDP tasks, the EU needs additional UAVs on top of those 
already in service or planned by EU members, the question of improved coordination in 
acquisition and operation still arises.  
 
If EU members take part in ESDP missions it is not difficult to find enough UAVs for the 
mission. But the more important question would be whether the UAVs would be able to provide 
data quickly to the different national contingents that would comprise an ESDP mission. In other 
words, the quick dissemination of information may pose a problem, rather than the number of 
UAVs available. It would be useful for the European EDA to make sure that a UAV ‘capability 
gap’ is not developing through lack of means of communication. 
 
The two places where one could see a capability gap is at the high and the extreme low end of 
the UAV spectrum – in HALE and in the micro and mini UAVs. Although such systems have 
been developed recently and are now widely deployed by US forces, EU forces have not yet 
adopted them on a large scale. For HALE, Europe depends on US-controlled platforms. 
However, since HALE UAVs would be most useful in large-scale operations against far-distant 
enemies, it seems unlikely that the EU would need a fully independent HALE capability.  
Mini/micro UAVs, on the other hand, have shown their value in combat operations and would 
clearly boost the capabilities of EU forces engaged in ESDP missions. 
 
The process of developing the much more complex high-tech UCAVs in Europe is partly 
following the now ‘normal’ path of cooperation between a number of European countries. While 
some coordination between the different EU UCAV programmes would be useful to save R&D 
funds, it still remains unclear what the role of UCAVs would be, both at national level and in the 
type of missions that form the core of ESDP focus. It would also still be useful to have several, 
rather uncoordinated UCAV development efforts proceeding in parallel, since that would give 
opportunities to develop alternative technologies. 
 
15

[Page 20 / 28 | chars: 1548]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Appendix I: Types of UAVs 
 
 
Micro-UAV: mostly portable, hand-launched, very short range/low altitude (± 2km/600m) with 
a simple and payload of less than 1kg (small video camera). 
Aladin ((EMT – Germany); 3.2kg UAV with ±5km range and 30 minutes endurance; small 
surveillance camera payload. 
 
Mini- or Close-UAV: very short range/low altitude (max. 10km/2000m) with a payload of 
several kg (high resolution large video or thermal camera). 
Bird Eye 400 (IAI – Israel); max. 80 min. + max. 300 m + 10 km range + 4.1 kg payload (large 
TV or thermal camera). 
 
Short-range, NATO-type or tactical UAV: short range/low-medium altitude (50-150km/max. 
4500m) with a payload of up to 100kg. 
Sperwer (Sagem – France). 
 
Medium-range or tactical UAV: medium range/medium altitude (200km/6000m) UAV with a 
payload of up to 150kg. 
Hermes 450 (Elbit – Israel). 
 
MALE 
(Medium 
Altitude, 
Long 
Endurance) 
UAV: 
long 
range/medium 
altitude 
(200km/10000m) UAV with up to 300kg payload. 
Heron/Eagle (IAI/EADS – Israel/France); over 40 hrs + over 9000 m + over 185 km range + 
250 kg payload. 
Predator (GA – USA). 
 
HALE (High Altitude, Long endurance) UAV: long range/high altitude (1000+km/10000+m) 
UAV with over 300kg payload. 
Global Hawk (NG – USA). 
 
This typology of different UAV types is however not universally agreed. The US armed forces 
for example use a system if ‘tiers’, which only partly correspond with the typology above. To 
make matters worse, the different US services use different definotions of their tiers. 
 
 
16

[Page 21 / 28 | chars: 1703]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Appendix II: The main components of UAV systems 
 
 
 
Airborne part – aircraft 
 
 
Airframe – wings and body. 
Engine – most UAVs are powered by a piston (reciprocating) engine driving a propeller. 
Faster and higher flying UAV use turboprop or jet engines. Electric, battery or fuel-cell 
powered, engines are becoming usual on micro- and mini-UAVs. 
Sensors – radar, photo or video camera, IR scanners or ELINT are most common. 
Sensors may include a (laser) target designator to provide guidance for stand-off guided missiles 
and shells. 
Control system – used to fly the UAV. Either a two-way data link (radio) for remote 
control or an onboard computer (generally with GPS navigation) connected to the aircraft 
control system. 
Data link – One-way (radio) link transmitting data collected by sensors. 
Recovery system – optional; most modern UAVs land like normal aircraft; earlier UAVs 
often use a parachute to land. 
 
 
 
Ground-based part 
 
 
Launcher – many UAVs are launched by a catapult-type launcher or with a rocket 
booster. UAVs with a wheeled undercarriage for take off like a normal aircraft, which is less 
stressing on the UAVs airframe, is becoming more common. 
Control system – used to fly the UAV; this includes a ‘cockpit’ from which the ‘pilot’ on 
the ground flies the UAVs (if remote-controlled). It is linked by two-way (radio) link to the 
UAV. The control system may include sub-control systems allowing other operators to take over 
flight. 
Data link – receiver for sensor data transmitted from the UAV. There may be several 
receivers of data, including some not part of the UAV system. 
Transport 
and 
maintenance 
– 
UAV 
systems 
are 
generally 
mobile.
 
17

[Page 22 / 28 | chars: 2363]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Appendix III - Tables 
 
Table 1: UAV/UCAV in service or planned by EU members 
 
The table list all known UAV and UCAV in currently in service or planned by all current 27 EU 
members. Data are as of June 2007. 
 
Country 
Supplier 
Type 
Name 
No. 
Year 
Comment 
 
Austria 
 
TUAV 
 
 
 
Plan since 2000. 
Belgium 
MBLE – Belgium 
TUAV 
Epervier 
 
 
Replaced by B-Hunter. 
 
IAI – Israel 
TUAV 
B-Hunter 
18 
2002 
With air force; with 3 systems; 
chosen 
over 
Ranger 
(Israel/Switzerland) and Sperwer 
(France). 
Bulgaria 
 
TUAV 
 
 
 
Possible interest since 2005. 
Cyprus 
IAI – Israel 
TUAV 
Searcher-2 
2 sys. 2002 
With army. 
Czech Rep. 
Air Force – Czech Rep. 
TUAV 
Sojka 
8 
1995 
With army. 
Denmark 
Sagem – France 
TUAV 
Sperwer 
12 
2001 
With army; with 2 systems; 
named Tornfalken in Denmark; to 
be sold 2007 (to Canada) since 
Denmark 
unsatisfied 
with 
performance. 
Finland 
IAI – Israel 
TUAV 
Ranger 
(12) 
2001 
With air force: 1 system ordered 
1999 and 1 in 2003; ordered via 
RUAG (Switzerland). 
France 
Canadair – Canada 
TUAV 
CL-89 
7 sys. (1974) With army; named AN/USD-501 
by NATO; replaced by CL-289. 
 
Canadair – Canada 
TUAV 
CL-289 
50 
1992 
With army; probably with 8 
systems; named AN/USD-502 by 
NATO; named PIVER by France. 
 
Sagem 
TUAV 
Crecelle 
2 sys. 1994 
With army. 
 
IAI - Israel 
TUAV 
Hunter 
1 sys. (1995) With army; delivered 1995-1997. 
 
Sagem – France 
TUAV 
SDTI 
18 
(2007) With army; replacing Crécerelle. 
 
IAI – Israel  
MALE 
Eagle-1 
3 
(2007) With air force; ordered 2001 for 
delivery 
2007-2009; 
interim 
acquisition via EADS as ‘SIDM’; 
won competition from US RQ-1 
offered via Sagem (France). 
 
 
MALE 
 
12-24 plan 
Plan 
for 
additional 
MALE; 
probably EuroMale or Eagle-2 
developed by EADS and Dassault 
(France) and based on IAI (Israel) 
Heron or Heron-2. Watchkeeper 
(based in Elbit (Israel) Hermes) 
offered by Thales. 
 
 
TUAV 
 
 
plan 
‘DEVIN’ plan for VTOL UAV for 
army 
and 
navy 
from 
2012; 
possibly EADS Orka-1200. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
Sagem – France 
UCAV 
Sperwer-B 
 
plan 
Feasability 
study 
for 
armed 
Sperwer-B UAV. 
 
 
Neuron – EU 
UCAV 
Neuron 
 
 
Technology 
demonstrator 
development project. 
 
Germany 
 
TUAV 
CL-289 
(50) 
1990 
With army; named AN/USD-502 
by NATO; named AOLOS-289 in 
Germany. 
 
 
TUAV 
Luna 
(30) 
2000 
With army. 
 
18

[Page 23 / 28 | chars: 2313]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

mini 
Aladin 
(120) (2004) With army 
 
STN – Germany 
TUAV 
KZO 
60 
2005 
With army; with 6 systems; 
originally 
French-German 
Eurodrone (Matra and STN Atlas) 
development from which France 
pulled out. 
 
NG – USA  
HALE 
Global Hawk 4-6 
(2009) With 
air 
force; 
Euro 
Hawk 
version; for SIGINT with EADS 
and R&S equipment; ±EUR600 
million order. 
 
NG – USA  
HALE 
Global Hawk  
(2010) Possible plan for additional Global 
Hawk/Euro Hawk with radar to be 
ordered 2008. 
 
 
MALE 
 
 
plan 
Plan 2004 for MALE with air 
force; RQ-1 (USA) offered with 
production by Diehl in Germany. 
 
Greece 
HAI – Greece  
TUAV 
Pegasus 
 
(2003) Modified 2005 to Pegasus-2. 
 
GD – USA 
MALE 
RQ-1 
6 
2002 
 
Sagem – France 
TUAV 
Sperwer 
(16) 
2004 
2 systems delivered 2004-2006 
and 2 systems ordered 2006. 
 
Neuron – EU 
UCAV 
Neuron 
 
n.a. 
Development project. 
 
Ireland 
 
TUAV 
 
2 
plan 
EUR1 million 2005 plan for 2 
small UAV. 
 
Italy 
GD – USA 
MALE 
RQ-1B 
4 
(2007) With air force; equipped with 
el/op sensors and radar; assembled 
in Italy by Meteor. 
 
 
MALE 
 
(2-4) plan 
Plan for additional MALE UAV 
since 2002; probably RQ-1B. 
 
Meteor – Italy 
TUAV 
Mirach-20 
5 
 
With army. 
 
Meteor – Italy 
TUAV 
Mirach-26 
? 
 
With army. 
 
Meteor – Italy 
TUAV 
Mirach-150 ? 
 
With army. 
 
Neuron – EU 
UCAV 
Neuron 
- 
n.a. 
Development project. 
 
Canadair – Canada 
TUAV 
CL-89 
 
 
Replaced by CL-289. 
 
Canadair – Canada 
TUAV 
CL-289 
 
2002 
Replacing CL-89. 
 
Netherlands Sagem – France 
TUAV 
Sperwer 
32 
2002 
With army; with 4 systems. 
 
EMT – Germany 
mini 
Aladin 
10 
2006 
With army; bought for use in 
Afghanistan. 
 
 
MALE 
 
 
plan 
Plan for MALE; NLG140 m plan 
2001 for delivery 2007-2011; 
cooperation with France since 
2002; possibly Eagle-1 or Eagle-2. 
 
 
TUAV 
 
8 
 
Plan for 4 40-70km UAV systems 
from 2008. 
 
 
mini 
 
48 
 
Plan for 24 mini UAV systems 
from 2009. 
 
Poland 
AAIC – USA 
MALE 
RQ-7B 
2 sys 2007 
Plan for MALE; original plan for 
Predator 
or 
MQ-5B 
Hunter 
replaced by RQ-7B (Shadow-
200); Paid with USD73 million 
US aid. 
 
 
MALE 
 
 
plan 
Plan for additional 3-4 MALE 
systems; probably Shadow-200 
(RQ-7B). 
 
Romania 
AAIC – USA 
TUSV 
Shadow-600 (11) 
(1999) With air force; first 6 ordered 
1997; 5 more ordered 2000. 
 
19

[Page 24 / 28 | chars: 1503]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Spain 
 
TUAV 
 
 
plan 
Possible plan for UAV for navy 
frigates; Fire Scout offered by 
IZAR (Spain) and NG (USA) 
since 2002. 
 
 
TUAV 
 
 
plan 
Plan for medium-altitude UAV 
with laser designator. 
 
Sweden 
Sagem – France 
TUAV 
Sperwer 
(9) 
(1999) With army; with three systems; 
named Ugglan in Sweden 
 
EADS - France 
MALE 
Eagle 
 
plan 
Plan since 2000 for MALE; Altus 
+ Predator + Hermes-1500 + 
Eagle candidate; Eagle found only 
acceptable; 1 Eagle tested 2002. 
 
Neuron – EU 
UCAV 
Neuron 
 
n.a. 
Development project. 
 
UK 
Canadair – Canada 
UAV 
CL-89 
 
(1974) With army; named Midge in UK; 
replaced by Phoenix 
 
BAE – UK 
TUAV 
Phoenix 
198 
1998 
With army; with 8 UAV systems. 
 
MiTex - ? 
Micro 
Buster 
 
2005 
With army 
 
 
Mini 
Desert Hawk  
(2005) With army. 
 
GA – USA 
MALE 
Predator 
3 
(2007) With air force; ‘Project Dabinett’; 
replacing Canberra PR-9 long-
range/high-altitude reconnaissance 
aircraft (in service since 1960s); 
with sensor package as also used 
on Tornado aircraft; Predator-B 
(as Falcon Prowl) and Eagle 
(Heron) 
(EADS/IAI 
– 
France/Israel) 
evaluated 
2004-
2005 in ‘JUEP’ (Joint UAV 
Experimental 
Programme) 
evaluation programme for long-
range UAV. 
 
Elbit – Israel 
MALE 
Hermes-450 21 
 
With Watchkeeper system; in 
service from 2010 
 
NATO 
NG – USA 
HALE 
RQ-4 
 
 
Part of NATO AGS system; paid 
by NATO and under NATO 
control. 
 
Sources: SIPRI Arms Transfers database and archives; Military Balance 2006 and 2007. 
 
20

[Page 25 / 28 | chars: 2539]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 2: UAV/UCAV produced or in development in EU countries 
The table list all known UAV and UCAV in production or development in all current 27 EU members. 
 
 
National 
 
Country 
Producer 
Type 
Name 
Year 
Comment 
 
Austria 
Siebel 
TUAV 
Camcopter 
 
VTOL (helicopter) UAV. 
Belgium 
MBLE 
TUAV 
Epervier 
1976 
Last 
(Asmodée 
version) 
produced 
1988; no longer in service. 
Czech Rep. Czech Air force 
TUAV 
Sojka 
1995 
Also 
marketed 
by 
AviaTronic 
(Hungary). 
France 
Sagem 
TUAV 
Crecerelle 
1994 
No longer in production; being replaced 
by Sperwer. 
 
Sagem 
TUAV 
Sperwer 
 
Improved export version of Crecelle; 
named SDTI in France. 
 
Sagem 
TUAV 
Sperwer HV 
- 
High-speed UAV developed 2001 from 
Sperwer. 
 
Sagem 
MALE 
Sperwer LE 
- 
Developed 2001 from Sperwer. 
 
Sagem 
mini 
TMD-3 
- 
 
 
EADS/CAC 
TUAV 
Fox 
 
Not acquired by France; only for 
export. 
 
EADS 
MALE 
Eagle-1 
(2007) Version of IAI (Israel) Heron UAV 
with EADS sensors. 
 
EADS 
MALE 
Eagle-2 
 
Developed in cooperation with IAI 
(Israel) from Heron/Eagle-1; probably 
version of Heron-2 with EADS sensors. 
 
EADS/Dassault 
MALE 
EuroMale 
 
Developed in cooperation with IAI 
(Israel) from IAI Heron. 
 
EADS/Guimbal 
TUAV 
Orka-1200 
 
VTOL helicopter UAV based on G-2 
Cabri light helicopter. 
 
EADS 
mini 
Scorpio-30 
 
VTOL UAV. 
 
EADS 
micro 
Scorpio-6 
 
VTOL UAV. 
Germany 
EMT 
TUAV 
LUNA 
2000 
Also named LUNA X-2000 
 
EMT 
Micro 
Aladin 
(2004) 
 
EMT 
Micro 
Mikado 
 
EMT 
Micro 
Fancopter 
 
VTOL Micro 
 
EMT 
MALE 
X-13 
 
Being developed. 
 
EADS/R&S 
 
Euro Hawk 
(2009) Version of NG (USA) Global Hawk 
with German SIGINT sensors. 
 
Diehl 
MALE 
RQ-1B 
 
Plan for production of GA (USA) RQ-
1B Predator in Germany if ordered by 
German armed forces. 
 
Rheinmetall 
TUAV 
KZO 
2005 
 
 
Rheinmetall 
TUAV 
Tucan 
 
Designed for export; status uncertain. 
 
Rheinmetall 
UCAV 
Taifun 
 
UAV with secondary one-way attack 
drone; developped from KZO and 
further developed to TARES 
 
Rheinmetall 
UCAV 
TARES 
 
UAV with secondary one-way attack 
role; being developed. 
 
Dornier (EADS) 
TUAV 
SEAMOS 
 
VTOL UAV; development cancelled. 
Greece 
HAI/KETA 
TUAV 
Pegasus 
(2003) 
 
HAI/KETA 
TUAV 
Pegasus-2 
2005 
Modification of Pegasus. 
 
HAI/Northrop 
TUAV 
TELAMON 
- 
Joint 
development 
with 
Northrop 
(USA); based on US Chickar-3 target 
drone; development cancelled. 
 
3 Sigma (EADS) 
TUAV 
Nearchos 
 
3 Sigma (EADS) 
TUAV 
Iris 
 
3 Sigma (EADS) 
TUAV 
Alkyon 
 
3 Sigma (EADS) 
TUAV 
Perseas 
 
21

[Page 26 / 28 | chars: 1975]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Italy 
Meteor (Finmeccanica) TUAV 
Mirach-20 
 
Developed from target drone. 
 
Meteor (Finmeccanica) TUAV 
Mirach-26 
 
Meteor (Finmeccanica) TUAV 
Mirach-150 
 
Developed from Mirach-100 target 
drone. 
 
Meteor (Finmeccanica) TUAV 
Nibbio 
 
Developed from Mirach-150. 
 
Meteor (Finmeccanica) MALE 
Mirach-2000 
 
Being developed. 
 
Galileo (Finmeccanica) TUAV 
Falco 
 
Alenia (Finmeccanica) MALE 
Sky-Y 
 
Technology demonstrator; first flown 
2007; probably to be integrated in 
Dassault/Alenia/Saab 
MALE 
programme. 
 
Alenia (Finmeccanica) HALE 
Molynx 
 
In development since 2006. 
 
Alenia (Finmeccanica) MALE 
Sky-X 
 
Technology 
demonstrator 
for 
MALE/UCAV; also named SkyLynx; 
first flown 2005. 
 
Netherlands Private 
Micro 
Delfly 
 
Technology demonstrator. 
 
Sweden 
Saab 
TUAV 
Skeldar V-150 
(2007) VTOL (helicopter) UAV. 
 
UK 
BAE 
TUAV 
Phoenix 
(1995) No longer in production. 
 
BAE 
MALE 
Herti-1A 
 
Developed for military and civilian use; 
based on (Poland) powered glider 
airframe. 
 
BAE 
UCAV 
 
BAE 
UCAV 
 
 
 
Inter-EU 
 
Countries Producer 
Type 
Name 
Year 
Comment 
 
Belgium?/ 
France/ 
Spain 
Neuron 
UCAV 
Neuron 
 
Tcehnology demonstrator development 
programme; Belgium may join. 
 
France/ 
Germany 
 
TUAV 
CL-289 
1992 
Produced in cooperation with Canadair 
(Canada); UAV produced in Canada 
and Germany; sensors produced in 
France. 
France/ 
Germany/ 
Spain 
EADS 
HALE 
AUAV 
 
In development. 
 
France/ 
Italy 
EADS 
MALE 
Surveyor 
 
In development; fast UAV based on 
Meteor (Italy) Mirach-100 target drone; 
possibility to act as UCAV. 
France/ 
Dassault 
Italy/ 
Alenia (Finmeccanica) 
Sweden 
Saab 
MALE 
? 
 
Development agreed 2007; based on 
Neuron. 
Germany/ 
Spain 
EADS 
UCAV 
Barracuda 
 
Technology demonstrator development 
programme. 
 
‘Type’ is; ‘Year’ is the year when first in service – years in brackets are estimated or planned dates. 
Sources: SIPRI Arms Transfers database and archives. 
 
22

[Page 27 / 28 | chars: 905]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 3: UAV/UCAV exports from the EU 
 
The table list all known UAV and UCAV exports from all current 27 EU members to non-EU 
members. 
 
 
Country 
Supplier 
Type 
Name 
No. 
Year 
Comment 
 
Austria 
Egypt 
TUAV 
Camcopter 
2 sys. (2002) Reportedly 
ordered 
2001; 
2 
systems with probably 4 UAVs; 
for use on frigates. 
 
UAE 
TUAV 
Camcopter 
80 
2006- 
Delivery 2006-2008; including 
production 
of 
components 
in 
UAE. 
 
USA 
TUAV 
Camcopter 
 
 
Reportedly ordered for US forces 
2006; 
probably 
only 
for 
evaluation. 
France 
Indonesia 
TUAV 
Fox AT-1 
4 
2005 
1 system with 4 UAV. 
 
Canada 
TUAV 
Sperwer 
(11) 
 
Used in Afghanistan; performance 
criticised by Canada but more 
ordered and delivered 2006. 
Germany 
Pakistan 
TUAV 
LUNA 
(3) 
(2007) 3-4 Luna ordered 2006. 
 
Italy 
Pakistan 
TUAV 
Falco 
4 
2006 
 
 
Sources: SIPRI Arms Transfers database and archives. 
 
 
 
 
 
23

[Page 28 / 28 | chars: 1230]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 4: Operational use of UAV by EU members 
 
The table list all known operational use in war zones of UAV and UCAV by all current 27 EU 
members. 
 
Country 
System 
Year 
Comment 
 
Belgium 
B-Hunter 
2005 
Used in Afghanistan 
 
B-Hunter 
2006-07 Used in DRC (EUFOR mission) 
France 
CL-289 
1999 
Used in Kosovo war and aftermath 
 
Crecerelle 
1999 
Used in Kosovo war 
 
Hunter 
1999 
Probably used in Kosovo war and aftermath 
 
? 
2007 
Used in Lebanon (UNIFIL mission) 
Germany 
CL-289 
1999 
Used in Kosovo war and aftermath 
 
LUNA 
(1999) 
Prototype used in aftermath of Kosovo war 
 
Aladin 
2004-07 Used in Afghanistan 
 
Luna 
2005-07 Used in Afghanistan 
Netherlands Aladin 
2006-07 Used in Afghanistan 
 
Sperwer 
2006-07 Used in Afghanistan 
UK 
CL-89 
1990-91 Used in Gulf War 
 
Phoenix 
1999-01 Used in Kosovo war and aftermath 
 
Phoenix 
2003-07 Used in Iraq war and aftermath 
 
RQ-1 Predator 
(2006-07) UK personnel involved in US Predator operations; possibly 
loaned by UK from USA. 
 
Buster 
2005-07 Used in Afghanistan 
 
Raven 
2006-07 Cooperation in use of US Raven in Iraq 
 
Desert Hawk 
2006-07 Used in Afghanistan 
 
Sources: SIPRI Arms Transfers database and archives. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
24

