Source file: MP-IST-209-1760.pdf
Relative path: MP-IST-209-1760.pdf
Page count: 10
Extracted pages: 10

================================================================================

[Page 1 / 10 | chars: 5244]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Integration of a Commercial Unmanned Vehicle
into the Army Communications System
Jo˜ao Pedro Ara´ujo Silva
Academia Militar
silva.jpa3@exercito.pt
Ant´onio Manuel Cordeiro Grilo
Instituto Superior T´ecnico
antonio.grilo@inov.pt
Artur Jorge Coutinho Machado
Ex´ercito Portuguˆes
machado.ajsc@exercito.pt
Abstract—This study explores the integration of commercial
Unmanned Vehicles (UxVs) in military operations, focusing on
enhancing communication between these vehicles and their con-
trol centres. Global conflicts, particularly the Ukraine war, have
accelerated the development of autonomous military systems.
The Portuguese Army is investing in these technologies to lower
costs and speed up the acquisition, development, and integration
of these capabilities. These platforms have improved decision-
making and operational efficiency and can be applied in the
Portuguese Army and the other branches of the Armed Forces
(AF). This study contributes by developing an MAVLink library
for UxV communication, hybrid tools for data transmission using
military radios, Wireless Fidelity (Wi-Fi), and unmanned vehicle
navigation without dedicated autopilot hardware.
The solution developed was implemented using LAFVIN UGV,
and the tests were carried out with the support of the Tactical
Information and Communications System (SIC-T) project team.
After obtaining the results, it was possible to draw important
values and conclusions regarding using military radios — P/PRC-
525 and TR5000H — for integrating a UGV into the Battlefield
Management System (BMS).
Index Terms—UGV, BMS, MAVLink, Military Radios, Wi-Fi.
I. INTRODUCTION
H
UMAN life is priceless, and the loss of life can be
reduced considerably with the use of robots and au-
tonomous systems in the armed forces. Today, almost all
military organisations use robots to perform dangerous tasks
in high-risk environments [1].
A UxV is a vehicle that operates without a human on-
board, either remotely controlled or autonomously. There are
several types of UxVs: Unmanned Ground Vehicle (UGV),
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV), and Unmanned Maritime
Vehicle (UMV) [2]. Communications in a UxV are essential
to enable remote control and data transmission between the
vehicle and the operator [1].
In recent years, in the face of increasing military tensions
at a global level, especially with the start of the conflict
in Ukraine on 24 February 2022, there has been a notable
rush towards military technology. The purpose of this cam-
paign was to improve defence capabilities. The North Atlantic
Treaty Organization (NATO) identified Autonomous Systems
and Communications as technologies that will play a highly
disruptive role over the next two decades, playing a crucial role
in improving human performance and promoting symbiosis
between man and machine [3].
The Portuguese Army, through the 2023 Military Program-
ming Law, is making a significant investment in Autonomous
Systems through Project EXE02 - Remote and Autonomous
Systems. This study is aligned with this work package, which
aims to develop a communication subsystem to be applied in
UGVs. This capability will help military command decisions
and reduce human exposure to threats.
A. Objectives
The main objective of this project is to design an architec-
ture and develop software for the integration of commercial
UGVs into the SIC-T. The primary purpose of communications
in UGVs is to guarantee reliable, real-time data transmission.
This allows the operator to receive information from the
vehicle, such as sensor data, images, and video, and send con-
trol commands to remotely guide the UGV. Communication
protocols are crucial in establishing a reliable and efficient
connection between an UGV and the control centre [4].
Within this main objective, this study has the following
secondary objectives:
• To support piloting of a commercial UGV, without the
need for specific autopilot hardware such as Pixhawk line
or Ardupilot Mega;
• Development of a library that connects a UxV to the SIC-
T;
• Testing and evaluation of the developed solution.
II. BACKGROUND AND RELATED WORK
The UGVs can navigate in spaces that would be dangerous
or inaccessible to humans and can operate in increasingly
complex environments through intelligence and efficiency. By
equipping a UGV with a camera or other sensors, operators
can quickly analyse objects and regions of interest with
precision [5]. Space exploration, particularly on the Moon and
Mars, is among the most important. In recent years, NASA has
developed five UGV platforms: Sojourner (1997), Opportunity
(2004), Spirit (2004), Curiosity (2012), and Perseverance
(2021). In parallel, the China National Space Administration
has also developed an UGV, the Zhurong (2021) [6].
As for military UGVs, they have a long lineage, descending
from the Teletank of Russian origin and the Goliath of German
origin, both used in the Second World War. UGVs, as we
know them today, emerged in the second half of the 20th
century, around 1970, with the flourishing of microprocessor
technology. Many developments in robotics originated from
research and development projects by the Department of De-
fense (DoD) of the United States of America (USA). Despite
STO-MP-IST-209 
1760 - 1

[Page 2 / 10 | chars: 5864]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

the technological advances, in the 1990s, military interest was
flagged with the end of the Cold War. However, optimism
about robotics continued to grow in the new millennium, with
interest in equipping the AF with smaller, cheaper, and more
resistant UGVs. Counter-insurgency operations in Iraq and
Afghanistan boosted the use of UGVs, mainly to deal with
improvised explosive devices [7].
The ongoing war in Ukraine has had a profound impact
on the development of UGVs in Russia. Both sides are
increasingly deploying UAVs and UGVs for various tasks such
as combat, logistics, and medical evacuation. This conflict
has underscored the importance of UGVs in reducing soldier
casualties in hazardous situations [8].
A. Civilian UGV applications
The civilian applications of UGVs are wide. They can in-
clude power line testing, surveillance systems, mine detection,
data collection, agriculture, ocean exploration, and scientific
exploration in space as the main [9]. In much the same way
as they are used in the military, UGVs can also be used by the
police for surveillance and intervention operations in hostile
scenarios [10].
UGVs offer advantages over human operators, as they can
be used more often and consistently, potentially providing
substantial cost savings. Autonomous systems can also be
operated without safety measures or the equipment needed by
humans [5].
B. Military UGV applications
In the military context, UGVs are operated remotely, us-
ing wireless communication systems such as Radiofrequency
(RF), which enable real-time video transmission. Advanced
image processing techniques are used for automatic target
detection.
The dismounted mission support system requirements were
first outlined within the framework of the Uniied States Army’s
Future Combat System (FCS) program, which took place
between 2003 and 2009. The support tasks should generally
cover [11]:
• Combat support: involving reconnaissance, surveillance,
target acquisition, and fire support;
• Engineering support: involving mine detection, clearing
paths, destroying obstacles, building light bridges, and
fortifying terrain;
• Logistical support: transporting ammunition, collective
weapons, water, food, and medical evacuation.
C. Video compression and transmission
When piloting an UGV, video transmission becomes an
aspect of utmost importance. The main problem with this
transmission type is the high bandwidth demand, which makes
video compression very important. This action aims to make
video content available at a low bits rate while preserving sat-
isfactory image quality, in this case, for piloting the UGV. This
technique works by identifying and eliminating redundancies
[12].
D. Radio communication technologies applied to Commercial
UGVs
This subsection covers the leading radio communication
technologies in UxVs: Wi-Fi, Cellular Networks, and Tactical
Radios.
1) Wi-Fi: The IEEE 802.11 standard for a Wireless Local
Area Network (WLAN), known commercially as Wi-Fi, has
become essential daily [13]. Wi-Fi most commonly uses the
2.4 GHz Ultra High Frequency (UHF) and 5.8 GHz Super
High Frequency (SHF) radio bands.
Using Wi-Fi to command and control UxVs offers several
advantages that enhance operational efficiency and flexibil-
ity. One primary benefit is the ability to establish a robust
and high-bandwidth communication link, which supports the
transmission of large amounts of data, such as high-resolution
video and complex telemetry, in real-time. This capability
is advantageous in applications requiring detailed situational
awareness and precise control [14].
2) Cellular Network: Cellular networks consist of several
base stations, each dedicated to the wireless transmission and
reception of data in one or more “cells”. In this context, a
cell represents a specific region of the total geographical area
served by the network. In most deployments, one base station
covers three cells using a strategic antenna configuration and
efficient frequency planning [15].
The specific way in which the RF bands are used in mobile
telecommunications is called the wireless standard - the name
given to each generation of mobile telecommunications -
which have replaced each other over the last 30 years: 1G,
2G, 3G, 4G, and 5G. Each generation comprises a different
family of wireless protocols [16].
3) Proprietary communication hardware: There are several
examples of proprietary communication protocols for commu-
nicating with a UxV; this subsection presents some of the most
commonly used hardware.
The SiK Telemetry Radio is an open-source, small, and
lightweight radio platform for establishing telemetry connec-
tions between autopilots and ground stations [17].
The HM30 Full HD Transmission System by SIYI Tech-
nology sends video to the operator [18].
The Herelink system by CubePilot is an advanced remote
control and video transmission system designed for UxVs.
It integrates a remote controller with a built-in screen on a
customised Android operating system. This system supports
popular ground control software like QGroundControl and
Solex [19].
4) MAVLink: MAVLink is a middleware protocol that is
a universal language for autonomous systems. The main
function of this protocol is to ensure that UxVs can easily
talk to each other and Ground Control Station (GCS) by
sharing important data like their positions. Almost everyone
in the autonomous systems world uses MAVLink, even big
companies that do not always use open-source [20]. MAVLink
messages are formatted in binary code with a compact 8-
byte header, which makes them highly efficient. Built-in error
control mechanisms ensure data integrity [21].
The big deal with MAVLink is that it creates one common
way to communicate with UxVs, ground stations, and acces-
Integration of a Commercial 
Unmanned Vehicle into the Army Communications System
STO-MP-IST-209 
1760 - 2

[Page 3 / 10 | chars: 4798]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

sories. This means more options for everyone involved, from
autonomous systems makers to people using them, and it stops
any company from dominating the market [20]. MAVLink is
about improving how UxVs work together, sparking new ideas,
and helping the industry grow [20].
Since UAVs navigate through three-dimensional space, they
present a broad scenario for communicating position and
velocity data. Consequently, it makes sense to utilise the
same protocol for other vehicles, like UGVs moving in two-
dimensional space or UMVs, which operate in three dimen-
sions but beneath the ocean’s surface [20].
E. BMS
The BMS integrates the Army Command and Control
Information System (Sistema de Informac˜ao para o Comando
e Controlo do Ex´ercito) (SICCE) of the SIC-T, which in turn
supports the Command and Control (C2). The BMS works via
the radio network in the Very High Frequency (VHF) band in
secure mode (SECOM-V). This C2 system is designed for low-
ranking units (Battalion and below) in vehicular use, with an
application that facilitates the sharing of geographical position
in the field via portable terminals connected to a secure radio
network [22].
The BMS fulfils the requirements of the NATO, guaran-
teeing interoperability with the means of communication of
the alliance’s member countries through the Standardization
Agreement (STANAG) 5527 standard - Friendly Force Track-
ing [23].
F. Army Tactical Radios
This subsection presents two tactical radios used by the
Portuguese Army, the P/PRC-525 and the TR5000.
1) P/PRC-525: The P/PRC-525 Tactical Radio results from
a partnership between EID and Rohde & Schwarz. It operates
on High Frequency (HF), VHF, and UHF and follows the
Software Defined Radio (SDR) philosophy [22].
2) TR5000: In August 2019, to meet the Army’s needs,
TR5000 radios were purchased from Rohde & Schwarz’s
SOVERON family, in the vehicular and manpack versions,
TR5000V and TR5000H [24].
G. Related Work
The article “Unmanned Systems Interoperability in Military
Maritime Operations: MAVLink to STANAG 4586 Bridge”
presents a link between the MAVLink communication protocol
and STANAG 4586 — which defines the architectures, proto-
cols, data elements, and interfaces between the various control
systems of an unmanned aerial system. To realise this link,
converter software was developed on the UAV. This article
aimed to enable UAVs that communicate with MAVLink,
which is cheaper, to communicate with a GCS that uses
STANAG 4586. The proposed system was developed using
the Python programming language and a Raspberry Pi [25].
The experiments by the NATO IST-149-RTG group demon-
strate interoperability between UGV and C2 systems. The goal
was to test interoperability standards in real-world scenarios,
specifically the Joint Architecture for Unmanned Systems and
its interoperability profile. The experiments involved multiple
NATO countries using different UGVs and GCS, demonstrat-
ing that systems could be easily extended to comply with
these standards. No experiments were carried out with UAVs
in this experiment due to technical problems. However, the
integration of UAVs that used the MAVLink communication
protocol was studied [26].
The report by the Estonian Defence Investment Centre [27]
analyses eleven platforms from different companies/consortia
from various countries. The report concludes that, in general,
all the UGVs were able to drive in an open field with
waypoints based on satellite navigation systems; the same was
not true in rougher scenarios or with vegetation. Table 1 shows
the companies/consortium, platform and country of origin.
TABLE 1: List of companies and the platforms that participated in the
Estonian trials [27].
Company/Consortium
Platform
Country of Origin
ARX Landsysteme
GEREON RCS
Germany
charismaTec OG
ARTUS PTAone
Austria
Czech University of
Defence/ VOP CZ, s.p.
TAROS V4
Czech Republic
Diehl Defence
Ziesel
Germany
Hentschel System
MoSeS UGV
Germany
iMUGS
THeMIS 4.5 +
iMUGS autonomy kit
Multinational
consortium
LEM S.R.L
RANGER-POLARIS
570
Italy
Milrem Robotics
THeMIS 4.5 +
MIFIK
Estonia
Nexter-KNDS
ULTRO 600
France
Rheinmetall Canada
Mission Master SP
Canada
Star Defence Logistics &
Engineering
SR-0001 UGV 4x4
Spain
The THeMIS UGV uses an IP radio at 2.4 GHz. It employs
MIMO technology in a mesh network with 4W of power. This
configuration allows a control range of up to 1.5 kilometres
in line of sight [29].
Fig. 1: THeMIS UGV [29].
The Gereon RCS UGV of ARX Landsysteme in terms of
remote control and communication [28]:
• Mobile communication (5G backwards compatible);
• Wi-Fi;
• Radio frequencies of 698 — 960 MHz, 1710 — 2700
MHz, 3200 — 3800 MHz, 2.4 — 2.5 GHz and 5 — 6
GHz.
STO-MP-IST-209 
1760 - 3 
Integration of a Commercial 
Unmanned Vehicle into the Army Communications System

[Page 4 / 10 | chars: 2624]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Fig. 3: General architecture — Wi-Fi.
Fig. 2: ARX Robotics GEREON RCS — Medium Autonomous
Transportation Platform [28].
III. SOLUTION FOR INTEGRATING A COMMERCIAL UGV
INTO THE ARMY COMMUNICATIONS SYSTEM
For the communication without autopilot hardware, two
architectures were used: one with Wi-Fi communication, pre-
sented in Figure 3 and the other using Combat-Net Ra-
dio (CNR), represented in Figure 4. The LAFVIN Multi-
Functional Smart Car Kit was used for this implementation,
representing the UGV and Arduino.
The onboard Raspberry Pi device connects to different
components of the architecture. The onboard Raspberry Pi ↔
Arduino connection is designed to send the control commands
received by the Raspberry Pi to the Arduino.
The Raspberry Pi ↔GCS connection is designed to send
the control commands to the Raspberry Pi and GPS and image
to the GCS.
Figure 4 depicts the scenario with a radio connected to
the UGV. This scenario makes sense when the UGV is large
enough to carry a radio. In this specific application, the
LAFVIN UGV is not used with a vehicular radio in moving
tests, given its size, it can only be used in static tests or with
small radios. In situations without a radio, all communications
with the UGV are via Wi-Fi.
When communicating with CNR, the computer on the GCS
and the Raspberry Pi connect to the radio via a network cable.
The radios on both sides need to be connected to the antenna,
which is made using a coaxial cable with an N connector. The
used antenna will depend on the type of radio, manpack, or
vehicle version used in each scenario. On the GCS side, the
gamepad connects to the computer via USB; on the UGV side,
the GPS connects to the Raspberry Pi via USB. In distinction,
the Raspberry Pi and the camera are connected using a Flexible
Printed Circuit (FPC). The Arduino connects to the Raspberry
Pi via a serial cable.
In Wi-Fi communication, all connections are used except
the ones to the tactical radios since Wi-Fi is used for commu-
nication, and this is done via the network boards integrated
into each device (GCS computer and Raspberry Pi).
A. GCS Architecture
The GCS MAVProxy software establishes a connection with
the Raspberry Pi. The system GCS is a proxy server between
the Raspberry Pi, Mission Planner, and BMS. The architecture
of the GCS has to be like this so that data can be sent/received
simultaneously to the BMS and the Mission Planner. This
architecture also makes it possible to filter the messages sent
to each of the software programs.
Integration of a Commercial 
Unmanned Vehicle into the Army Communications System
STO-MP-IST-209 
1760 - 4

[Page 5 / 10 | chars: 1818]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Fig. 4: General architecture — Wi-Fi + Military Radios.
Fig. 5: Architecture GCS.
In the case of communication with CNR, since there is a
hybrid communication situation in which some data is sent
via Wi-Fi and some via military radios, two connections were
established between the Raspberry Pi and the MAVProxy
running on the GCS.
B. Protocol Stack
The protocol stack for communication over Wi-Fi consists
of a conventional TCP/IP stack. The transport layer will be
TCP or UDP, and the Network layer will be IP; the Physical
+ Data Link layers correspond to Wi-Fi protocols.
Regarding communication over the P/PRC-525 and TR5000
tactical radios, represented by Figure 6, it should be noted that
it has a routing module Mobile Ad Hoc Network (MANET)
module at the network layer. Like Wi-Fi, the transport layer is
TCP/UDP, and the Network layer is IP. The Physical + Data
Link layers correspond to protocols specific to radio.
Fig. 6: Protocol stack of a MANET network.
The protocol stack may change slightly depending on the
radio used. Specific protocols may be implemented inside or
outside the radio technology, depending on the radio model.
C. Hardware components
Since the Raspberry Pi 3 Model B+ is already a resource,
its price is low, and it is already used in many identical im-
plementations. Hence, the choice went to it, saving resources.
Since the aim was to control the vehicle via Mission
Planner, the sensors of the LAFVIN kit were not used; only
the Arduino UNO, V5 Expansion Board, 4 DC Motors, and
the L298N Motor Board were used.
The UGV consists of the following components:
• Raspberry Pi 3 Model B+;
• LAFVIN kit;
• Battery;
• G-Mouse GPS VK-162;
• Raspberry Pi Camera Module 2;
• Radio.
STO-MP-IST-209 
1760 - 5 
Integration of a Commercial 
Unmanned Vehicle into the Army Communications System

[Page 6 / 10 | chars: 3835]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The use of a military radio in the UGV is only for commu-
nication with CNR and depends on the weight and volume
of the radio, taking into account the payload capacity of the
UGV. The G-Mouse GPS VK-162 with a USB connection
to the Raspberry Pi was adopted. The hardware used in the
LAFVIN UGV for Wi-Fi communication is represented by
Figure 7.
Fig. 7: Hardware in LAFVIN UGV for Wi-Fi communication.
The GCS consists of the following components:
• Computer;
• Gembird Gamepad;
• Radio.
As with the UGV, military radios are used in the GCS only
for communication with CNR. It is important to note that
in this study, the camera used for transmission is from the
same manufacturer as the onboard unit. This makes it easier to
integrate the camera with the onboard unit; it is only necessary
to configure the camera in the settings without the need for
specific software.
D. Software Modules
In this section, three software scripts were developed, which
will be described in the corresponding subsections. The soft-
ware developed was also integrated with the GCS software.
The delay block in sending heartbeat logic allows the
control of the frequency of sending HEARTBEAT messages.
The delay block, in send position logic, present in both
scripts allows adjusting the frequency of position messages,
GPS RAW
INT in the case of Figure 8, and XML messages
to the BMS with the identification of the UGV and its position,
in the case of Figure 9. This frequency adjustment makes
it possible to communicate in scenarios with less bandwidth
available.
1) Script 0 — Arduino: The LAFVIN UGV manufac-
turer code, represented by Script 0 in the general archi-
tecture, had to be adapted as communication is now via a
serial cable, and the manufacturer did not plan this mode
of communication; it runs on the Arduino. In Arduino,
the function processRaspberryPiCommand(String
command) allows commands to be received via a serial
connection to the Raspberry Pi. The manufacturer code did
not include this communication mode. To avoid problems, all
the other communication modes — Infrared and Bluetooth —
were deactivated.
2) Script 1 — Management of the link between Raspberry
Pi, Arduino, and GCS: Script 1, shown in Figure 8, represents
a link between the UGV and the ground station used to send
the UGV position to the GCS. It also is used to send command
controls to the UGV. This script runs on the Raspberry Pi.
In the case of communication using military radios, it is
necessary to initiate two connections to MAVProxy, one for
the radios and the other for Wi-Fi, since both are used.
The Raspberry Pi ↔Arduino connection is used to send the
control commands to the Arduino. All commands between the
GCS and the Raspberry Pi are sent via Wi-Fi in the configura-
tion using Wi-Fi. In the case of the configuration using tactical
radios, the heartbeats are sent by both communication channels
so that the availability of both can be seen. The UGV position,
through the send position(latitude, longitude,
altitude) function, is only sent using tactical radios.
This is the most critical communication component since it
displays the UGV position. By using military radios, it is
possible to exploit the encryption they offer and thus make
communication more secure.
Fig. 8: Script 1 — Management of the link between Raspberry Pi,
Arduino, and GCS.
3) GPS: To get the UGV position, the “gpsd”, “gpsd-
clients”, and “python-gps” libraries were used to obtain the
GPS data using the get_gps_data() function. These li-
braries had to be installed on Raspberry Pi. The initial step
was to start the session, and then the latitude, longitude and
altitude variables were updated in real-time.
Once
it
had
the
variables
to
update,
it
created
Integration of a Commercial 
Unmanned Vehicle into the Army Communications System
STO-MP-IST-209 
1760 - 6

[Page 7 / 10 | chars: 4210]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

the
send_position(latitude, longitude,
altitude)
function.
This
function
sends
MAVLink
GPS RAW INT
messages
with
latitude,
longitude,
and
altitude data to the Mission Planner.
4) Control
commands:
The
MAVLink
MAN-
UAL CONTROL messages are received by the Raspberry
Pi
using
the
handle _manual_control
function.
Depending on the parameters received, the corresponding
message is sent to the Arduino to operate the UGV:
• Front: send_command_to_arduino(%F#);
• Back: send_command_to_arduino(%B#);
• Right: send_command_to_arduino(%R#);
• Left: send_command_to_arduino(%L#).
To send control commands to the UGV, the Gembird
Gamepad was first connected to the GCS and then paired
with the Mission Planner. When connected to the Mission
Planner, two axes of movement were used, allowing the
UGV to move in four different directions. The axes were
chosen automatically by the Mission Planner, considering the
movement of the controller’s analog, selected by the user.
For movements in different directions on the same axis, the
“Reverse” option was used. The mode chosen was “Manual
Control”, which will be important in the type of MAVLink
messages generated at the GCS.
5) Script 2 — Management of the link between GCS and
BMS: Script 2, shown in Figure 9, runs on the GCS and
represents a link to the BMS. It creates an XML, and it is
sent to the BMS. This script aims to extract the UGV position
from MAVLink messages and generate an XML according to
STANAG 5527. The connection is established with port 14552,
where MAVLink messages are forwarded via MAVProxy. This
script can run on GCS if MAVProxy is forwarding messages
to port 14552 on localhost or on another machine.
The used XML model is the A2 of the STANAG 5527.
Depending on where the BMS is running, the XML must be
sent there. In a configuration where the BMS is running on
the GCS, it is enough to send it to localhost; otherwise, it
requires the IP of a machine on the network that is running
the BMS. In the tactical radio scenario, this sending is done
via military radios. The IP to which the XML is sent must be
configured in the function send_xml_file(filename,
server_ip, server_port) used to send the file.
In the BMS, in addition to the standard configuration, which
includes creating a mission with some mandatory parameters,
such as the configuration of the stack and GPS, a gateway must
be configured in the BMS with the port where the report will
be received, in this case, port 48882, and the message template
which will be used, in this case, FFT Systems—STANAG
5527 A1/A2.
Fig. 9: Script 2 — Management of the link between GCS and BMS.
6) Mission
Planner
Configuration:
This
subsection
presents the main aspects to be configured in the Mission
Planner, namely, receiving the video and sending the control
commands. The Mission Planner is configured on port
14551. Once the software is open, after running Script 1 and
then starting GCS with MAVProxy, a UDP connection is
automatically started on port 14551.
First, the configuration of video reception on the Mission
Planner and its capture and sending on the Raspberry Pi is
presented using the Raspivid and GStreamer libraries, respec-
tively. Then, in this section, the configuration of the joystick
in Mission Planner and the configurations to send control
commands are presented.
7) Video streaming: Image capture was first initiated using
the Raspivid application on the Raspberry Pi. Then, the
GStreamer application was used to send the video stream to
the Mission Planner, running on the GCS.
The quality of image capture has an influence on the band-
width required for communication. The quality of the image
is adjusted according to the characteristics of the transmission
channel, which will be analysed in the results.
IV. RESULTS
The solutions for the tests in the SIC-T project team will
be presented. To achieve this, tests were carried out using Wi-
Fi technology alone and a hybrid configuration using tactical
radios and Wi-Fi. The tactical radios fill an existing gap in
Wi-Fi communication — security — since the UGV position
is considered critical data.
STO-MP-IST-209 
1760 - 7 
Integration of a Commercial 
Unmanned Vehicle into the Army Communications System

[Page 8 / 10 | chars: 4365]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Generally speaking, the solution is to generate and send the
XML files containing the UGV’s position to the BMS, this
was executed using Script 2 and can be achieved using Wi-
Fi, Military Radios or other IP-based radio communication
technologies.
The Wi-Fi tests were divided into two scenarios: one using
existing network infrastructure and the other using the RAD-
MAVLink-Bridge architecture, which transforms the Rasp-
berry Pi into a wireless access point. The military radio tests
were divided into two scenarios: one exclusively using P/PRC-
525 Tactical Radios and the other using TR5000H radios.
The computer representing the GCS has Windows 11, a
Ryzen 7 3700U processor, and 16 GBytes of RAM.
The computer representing the BMS is the Getac used by
the Portuguese Army, which has Windows 10 Pro, an Intel
Core i5-6300U processor, and 8 GBytes of RAM.
A. Scenario 1: Wi-Fi
All the data was sent via Wi-Fi in the Wi-Fi tests shown
in Figure 10. The only requirement is that the GCS and the
Raspberry Pi be on the same network. The Wi-Fi protocol
used in the Wi-Fi tests was Wi-Fi 4 (802.11n) at a frequency
of 2.4 GHz.
Fig. 10: Network Architecture — Wi-Fi.
The BMS could be running on GCS by sending the XML,
by TCP, to localhost. In either case, Script 2 is required.
B. Scenario 2: Wi-Fi-RAD-MAVLink-Bridge
The RAD-MAVLink-Bridge script turns the Raspberry Pi
into a wireless access point. A Wi-Fi network (rad-bridge)
connects the GCS to this network and sends the necessary
commands. The Wi-Fi protocol used in the Wi-Fi-RAD-
MAVLink-Bridge tests was Wi-Fi 4 (802.11n) at a frequency
of 2.4 GHz. The architecture is similar to the one in Figure 10,
but considering that the network is generated on the Raspberry
Pi.
The BMS could be running on GCS by sending the XML,
by TCP, to localhost. In either case, Script 2 is required.
C. Scenario 3: Military Radios — P/PRC-525
In the configuration with P/PRC-525 Tactical Radio, VHF
(SECOM-V 102-104 MHz) radio communication in IPoA was
used to send the HEARTBEAT and GPS RAW INT messages
from the Raspberry Pi to the GCS and the XML with the UGV
position to the BMS; it is represented in Figure 11. All the
other data (control commands and video) was sent via Wi-Fi,
as in Figure 10.
Fig. 11: Network Architecture — P/PRC-525.
The choice of this scenario with the P/PRC-525 is because
these are the radios of most significant use in the Portuguese
Army. This scenario can be transported to a situation where
there are two manned tactical vehicles, a UGV and a vehicle
that symbolises the command vehicle (GCS).
Given the size of LAFVIN’s UGV, this configuration only
makes sense in a static situation. In a dynamic situation, data
from the UGV to the GCS would only be sent via Wi-Fi.
D. Scenario 4: Military Radios — TR5000H
In the configuration with TR5000H Tactical Radio, VHF
(225-228 MHz) radio communication in IPoA with continuous
phase modulation in balanced mode. It was used to send
the HEARTBEAT and GPS RAW INT messages from the
Raspberry Pi to the GCS and the XML with the UGV
position to the BMS; it is similar to the network architecture
represented in Figure 11. All the other data (control commands
and video) was sent via Wi-Fi, like in Figure 10.
This architecture was chosen because the TR5000 is the
radio most recently acquired by the Portuguese Army.
E. Solution Evaluation
The network performance results were determined using the
iPerf3 software in a configuration where the Raspberry Pi was
the server (sender), and the GCS was the client (receiver). In
the case of Wi-Fi tests, the iPerf3 commands were executed
in a scenario where communication was fully established,
representing an additional throughput consumption already
existing by the UGV C2. The tests with military radios
were carried out in two scenarios: one with no data to be
transmitted on the communication channel and the other with
HEARTBEAT, GPS RAW INT, and XML messages to be
sent.
Each iPerf test was conducted for approximately 60 seconds,
covering the following scenarios:
1) Measurement of throughput using TCP;
2) Bidirectional TCP bandwidth testing;
3) UDP testing for jitter and data loss analysis.
In the case of the tests with military radios, UDP and TCP
tests were performed simultaneously.
Integration of a Commercial 
Unmanned Vehicle into the Army Communications System
STO-MP-IST-209 
1760 - 8

[Page 9 / 10 | chars: 6525]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

F. Discussion
The Wi-Fi results illustrate the degradation in performance
when moving from static to dynamic environments, especially
in terms of bitrate and packet loss. UDP is particularly
sensitive to motion. In the TCP tests, 19.1 Mbit/s was obtained
with static communication.
The Wi-Fi-RAD-MAVLink-Bridge performs well in short-
range and moving conditions, with limited impact from move-
ment. However, distance significantly degrades performance,
particularly in bidirectional communication and UDP mode,
where packet loss becomes a significant issue, especially at 47
meters. The Raspberry Pi and GCS computer antennas have
an omnidirectional radiation diagram. Looking at a similar
example in a UAV configuration in [30], it’s clear that having a
directional antenna with a tracker on the GCS would increase
the range of a RAD-MAVLink-Bridge configuration. In the
TCP tests, 57.6 Mbit/s was obtained with static communica-
tion.
Analysing the results of P/PRC-535, maybe only one UGV
can be supported on the communication channel with this con-
figuration. This is because the Raspberry Pi has a bottleneck
on the communication channel, and because there is no traffic
control, the channel prioritises sending UDP. This proves to
be a problem, as it is more critical for the system to send an
Friendly Force Information (FFI) XMl than a HEARTBEAT
message. In the TCP tests, 574 bit/s was obtained with static
communication; in the UDP tests, 5.01 Kbit/s was obtained
with static communication.
After analyzing the results of the TR5000H tests, it can be
seen that this configuration can support one more UGV on the
communication channel. The TR5000H controls traffic since
it does not let UDP occupy all the capacity. More throughput
is used for TCP packets, which can be explained by the fact
that TCP packets are larger, so more throughput is used for
this transmission. One more time, the Raspberry Pi had a bot-
tleneck in the communication channel. In the TCP tests, 3.50
Kbit/s was obtained with static communication; in the UDP
tests, 2.49 Kbit/s was obtained with static communication. This
can be seen in the Table 2.
TABLE 2: Comparison of P/PRC-525 and TR5000H.
Radio
Transmission Rate
TCP: 574 bit/s
P/PRC-525
UDP: 5.01 Kbit/s
TCP: 3.50 Kbit/s
TR5000H
UDP: 2.49 Kbit/s
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this study, the first architecture for integrating UxVs
into the BMS was developed. It was possible to drive a
UGV without the need for specific autopilot hardware such as
Pixhawk line or Ardupilot Mega. Made integrations in BMS
developed for future exercises with entities outside the Army
using UxVs, such as ARmy Technological EXperimentation
(ARTEX), and data regarding the throughput required to drive
a UGV, different network architectures, and limitations of the
used hardware.
As for the Wi-Fi network tests, given that a communication
architecture was being used with relatively low-quality image
transmission and a relatively long position sending interval (10
seconds), it was noticeable that even in conditions with less
available bandwidth, it was possible to establish communica-
tion with the UGV. When there was less signal available, the
first thing that failed was the video transmission, with some
cuts in the image.
As for the tests with Wi-Fi-RAD-MAVLink-Bridge, it was
possible to observe that at short distances, it was possible
to command and control the UGV. However, the signal was
considerably degraded after about 40 meters. This configu-
ration is interesting for short distances and can be extended
using directional antennas. It can be applied as an alternative
to another radio communication mode, focussing on short
distances.
It was possible to communicate using military radios, as
only MAVLink HEARTBEAT and GPS RAW INT messages
and FFI XML were sent. Ideally, the frequency at which the
messages are sent should be adjusted considering the available
bandwidth, and the application itself, in the case of the P/PRC
525, would have to control the traffic. The TR5000H was
advantageous in almost all the tests. It performs automatic
traffic control and allows a parallel communication mode,
where data and voice can be sent simultaneously on two
channels, thus advantageous over the P/PRC-525.
It would be important to be more extensive in terms of the
test scenarios and frequencies used, but each test carried out
in Pac¸o de Arcos took a long time, leaving some interesting
configurations untested. The development that has been made
and the connection to the Mission Planner makes it possible
to drive a UGV with autopilot hardware using waypoints;
in a configuration like this, military radios would only be
necessary, as there would be no need to send video or control
commands.
REFERENCES
[1] Hendri Saputra and Midriem Mirdanies, Controlling Unmanned Ground
Vehicle Via 4 Channel Remote Control, Energy Procedia, vol. 68, April
2015. Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.egypro.2015.03.269
[2] Jie Chen, Jian Sun, and Gang Wang, From Unmanned Systems to
Autonomous Intelligent Systems, Engineering, vol. 12, pp. 16-19, 2022.
Available: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eng.2021.10.007
[3] NATO Science & Technology Organization, Science & Technology Trends
2023-2043 Across the Physical, Biological, and Information Domains,
2023.
[4] Xiao
Liang,
Shirou
Zhao,
Guodong
Chen,
Guanglei
Meng,
and
Yu
Wang,
Design
and
development
of
ground
station
for
UAV/UGV
heterogeneous
collaborative
system,
Ain
Shams
Engineering Journal, vol. 12, no. 4, pp. 3879-3889, 2021. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2090447921002136
[5] Blake Hament and Paul Oh, Unmanned aerial and ground vehicle (UAV-
UGV) system prototype for civil infrastructure missions, in 2018 IEEE
International Conference on Consumer Electronics (ICCE), 2018, pp. 1-
4. Available: https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCE.2018.8326346
[6] Semih
Beycimen,
Dmitry
Ignatyev,
and
Argyrios
Zolotas,
A
comprehensive
survey
of
unmanned
ground
vehicle
terrain
traversability
for
unstructured
environments
and
sensor
technology
insights,
Engineering
Science
and
Technology,
an
International
Journal,
vol.
47,
p.
101457,
2023.
Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2215098623001350
[7] Ash Rossiter, Bots on the Ground: An Impending UGV Revolution in
Military Affairs?, Small Wars & Insurgencies, vol. 31, no. 4, pp. 851–
873, 2020. Available: https://doi.org/10.1080/09592318.2020.1743484
STO-MP-IST-209 
1760 - 9 
Integration of a Commercial 
Unmanned Vehicle into the Army Communications System

[Page 10 / 10 | chars: 5089]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[8] Peter Felstead, Russian UGV Developments Influenced by Ukraine War,
European Security and Defence, June 2024. Available: https://euro-
sd.com/2024/06/articles/38818/russian-ugv-developments-influenced-by-
ukraine-war/
[9] Eman Almoaili and Heba Kurdi, Path Planning Algorithm for Un-
manned Ground Vehicles (UGVs) in Known Static Environments,
Procedia Computer Science, vol. 177, pp. 57-63, 2020. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877050920322766
[10] Junior
Yllatopa
Turpo
and
Jason
Chicoma-Moreno,
Tactical
Robot
Prototype
for
SWAT
and
Emergency
Response
Teams
in
Peru, in Engineering, Integration, and Alliances for a Sustainable
Development.
Hemispheric
Cooperation
for
Competitiveness
and
Prosperity
on
a
Knowledge-Based
Economy,
2020.
Available:
https://api.semanticscholar.org/CorpusID:226733270
[11] Marian Lopatka, UGV for Close Support Dismounted Operations –
Current Possibility to Fulfil Military Demand, Challenges to National
Defence in Contemporary Geopolitical Situation, vol. 2020, pp. 16-23,
October 2020. Available: https://doi.org/10.47459/cndcgs.2020.2
[12] B Sivam, Sumithra M G, and P Sreelatha, Survey on video com-
pression techniques for efficient transmission, Journal of Physics:
Conference
Series,
vol.
1916,
p.
012211,
May
2021.
Available:
https://doi.org/10.1088/1742-6596/1916/1/012211
[13] Kaveh Pahlavan and Prashant Krishnamurthy, Evolution and Impact
of Wi-Fi Technology and Applications: A Historical Perspective, Inter-
national Journal of Wireless Information Networks, vol. 28, pp. 1-17,
November 2020. Available: https://doi.org/10.1007/s10776-020-00501-8
[14] Junfeng Ge, Tao Li, and Tao Geng, The Wireless Communications for
Unmanned Surface Vehicle: An Overview, in Intelligent Robotics and
Applications, Zhiyong Chen, Alexandre Mendes, Yamin Yan, and Shifeng
Chen, Eds., Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2018, pp. 113–119.
ISBN: 978-3-319-97586-3.
[15] Magnus
Olsson,
Shabnam
Sultana,
Stefan
Rommer,
Lars
Frid,
and
Catherine
Mulligan,
Chapter
2
-
Architecture
Overview,
in
EPC and 4G Packet Networks (Second Edition), Academic Press,
Second Edition, 2013, pp. 17-64. ISBN: 978-0-12-394595-2. Available:
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B9780123945952000025
[16] Ivica Prli´c, Jerko ˇSiˇsko, Veda Varnai, Luka Pavelic, Jelena Macan,
Silvija Kobeˇs´cak, Mladen Hajdinjak, Mihovil Jurdana, Zdravko Cerovac,
Branimir Zauner, Marija Mihi´c, and Selma Avdagi´c, Wi-Fi technology
and human health impact: A brief review of current knowledge, Archives
of Industrial Hygiene and Toxicology, vol. 73, pp. 94-106, June 2022.
Available: https://doi.org/10.2478/aiht-2022-73-3402
[17] ArduPilot
Team,
SiK
Telemetry
Radio,
2024.
Available:
https://ardupilot.org/copter/docs/common-sik-telemetry-radio.html.
[Accessed: 2024-08-14].
[18] SIYI, HM30 FULL HD Transmission System User Manual, January
2024.
[19] CubePilot,
HereLink
Overview,
2024.
Available:
https://docs.cubepilot.org/user-guides/herelink/herelink-overview.
[Accessed: 2024-08-14].
[20] Auterion, MAVLink Communication Protocol: the open standard, March
2022. Available: https://auterion.com/mavlink-communication-protocol-
the-open-standard/. [Accessed: 2024-08-27].
[21] MAVLink,
MAVLink
Common
Messages,
2024.
Available:
https://mavlink.io/en/messages/common.html. [Accessed: 2024-08-14].
[22] Vasco Sequeira, Sistema de Comando e Controlo BMS - Battlefield
Management System, Revista Militar da Brigada Mecanizada - Atoleiros,
vol. 34, pp. 54-57, April 2020.
[23] North Atlantic Treaty Organization, STANAG 5527: Friendly Force
Tracking, NATO, Washington, D.C., USA, 2017.
[24] Regimento de Transmiss˜oes, Revista Mensagem 2021, Mensagem,
March 2021.
[25] Rodrigues, Alexandre Val´erio and Carapau, Rodolfo Santos and Mar-
ques, Mario Monteiro and Lobo, Victor and Coito, Fernando, OCEANS
2017 - Aberdeen, Unmanned systems interoperability in military mar-
itime operations: MAVLink to STANAG 4586 bridge, 2017. Available:
10.1109/OCEANSE.2017.8084866.
[26] Gl´owka, Jakub and Pellenz, Johannes and Nussbaumer, Thomas and
Roning, Juha and Kozik, Rafal and Baksaas, Magnus and Bounker, Paul
and De Cubber, Geert and Tiderko, Alexander and Volk, Andr´e and
Schneider, Frank and Mathiassen, Kim International Journal of Intel-
ligent Defence Support Systems, Demonstrating Interoperability Between
Unmanned Ground Systems and Command and Control Systems, 2021.
[27] European Defence Industrial Development Programme, Unmanned
Ground Vehicles Autonomy trials, 2023.
[28] ARX Landsysteme, Technical datasheet Gereon RCS, 2024.
[29] Milrem
Robotics,
The
THeMIS
UGV,
2024.
Available:
https://milremrobotics.com/defence/.
[30] Gesang Nugroho and Dicky Dectaviansyah, Design, manufacture
and performance analysis of an automatic antenna tracker for an
unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV), Journal of Mechatronics, Electrical
Power, and Vehicular Technology, vol. 9, p. 32, July 2018. Available:
https://doi.org/10.14203/j.mev.2018.v9.32-40
Integration of a Commercial 
Unmanned Vehicle into the Army Communications System
STO-MP-IST-209 
1760 - 10

