Source file: MP-IST-210-1A.03.pdf
Relative path: MP-IST-210-1A.03.pdf
Page count: 34
Extracted pages: 34

================================================================================

[Page 1 / 34 | chars: 3586]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision For Rapid Counter-Drone 
System Testing And Deployment 
Stanimir Arnaudov, Peter A. Chua, Thomas Mühlenstädt, Hanwool Park 
Resaro 
Törringstraße 22, 81675 München 
GERMANY 
peter.chua@resaro.ai, thomas.muehlenstaedt@resaro.ai, hanwool.park@resaro.ai 
ABSTRACT  
Computer vision (CV) is increasingly deployed across NATO militaries for critical defense tasks like 
drone detection and classification, drone tracking, and terminal guidance. This continues to revolutionize 
military operations on the battlefield, offering a new way to keep up with overwhelming adversary 
capabilities in low-cost drones employed en masse, amidst the complexities of modern urban warfare, 
declining manpower, and an overwhelming influx of imagery sources. Recent advancements in CV 
including more performant models with larger training datasets, and increased edge computing capacity 
on sensor platforms, have lowered the barrier to entry for automation. However, ethical considerations, 
legal responsibilities, and the critical human element in targeting decisions remain paramount. This 
creates a new bottleneck: humans’ ability to vet and further investigate model outputs, necessitating 
highly precise and accurate models that can support military operators without overwhelming them with 
information.  
Ensuring the reliability of CV models through robust Testing, Evaluation, Verification, and Validation 
(TEVV) is paramount for effective deployment. However, the limited generalization of classical CNNs 
across diverse real-world conditions hinders scalability. Current TEVV methods, including public 
benchmarks, often lack relevance for specific counter-drone applications and imagery, while bespoke 
testing is resource-intensive. Bridging the gap between governance, operational, and technical 
requirements is crucial for scaling CV in defense. Therefore, ensuring CV models scale for defense and 
security users requires designing routine structures and processes that would bridge the gap between 
governance, operational, and technical requirements.  
To address these issues, we propose an assurance framework tailored for mission-oriented, high-risk 
drone defense CV systems for electro-optical and infra-red imagery. This framework lays out the criteria 
to create robust internal reference datasets and quantify their properties, including an approach to qualify 
hard-to-detect targets, and introduces comprehensive pre-deployment testing checklists for CV models. 
Some examples of actual implementation will be shown, as well as how highly contextualized, use-case 
specific internal benchmarks can be developed to compare models in a standardized manner. Overall, this 
framework aims to simplify and scale automated testing, identifying weak performance spots, and 
providing decision-makers with clear go/no-go criteria for deploying CV models, ultimately bridging the 
testing gap and fostering trust in these critical technologies. It will also enhance interoperability through 
providing a common frame of reference across like-minded defense agencies evaluating performance on 
perception software used in counter-drone solutions, and facilitating information-sharing. 
1.0 INTRODUCTION 
Computer Vision (CV) is a field of study relating to how computers can understand and analyze information 
from the environment using visual data such as images and videos, across a wide range of imaging 
techniques and platforms including electro-optical, thermal, and radar sensors. Over the past decade, CV has 
STO-MP-IST-210
1A.03 - 1

[Page 2 / 34 | chars: 4790]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision 
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
made significant advancements from the increasing adoption of techniques in artificial intelligence (AI) 
including machine learning, deep learning, and pattern recognition. Accordingly, CV systems have also seen 
widespread use in defense applications and systems, augmenting human operators in processing and 
analyzing data from a wide variety of imaging sensors for target detection, classification, tracking, and 
prosecution. Applied to the counter-drone defense mission, CV systems can be useful in (a) extending 
operators’ ability to perceive small-sized drones beyond relying on human sight, (b) ease classification, 
tracking and prosecution tasks through computer automation and therefore handle more challenging targets, 
(c) compensate for the other counter-drone sensors’ limitations and enhance system redundancy, at the
expense of increased computational requirements and system complexity. In this paper, the term 'drone'
refers to a flying vehicle without a pilot and should be understood as interchangeable with ‘unmanned aerial
vehicle’ (UAV). The counter-drone mission specifically focuses on detecting, classifying, tracking, and
targeting these drones/UAVs, excluding their ground control systems, pilots and support crew and their
equipment, and other unmanned aerial system (UAS) components.
2.0 RATIONALE 
The rapid proliferation of drones across the inventories of potential adversaries, spurred by advances in 
commercial and recreational applications but adapted for military uses, has concurrently given rise to a 
critical challenge: the need for effective counter-drone measures. This escalating drone adoption has spurred 
the development of numerous solutions aimed at detecting, tracking, and neutralizing unauthorized or hostile 
drones. However, the sheer variety and complexity of these emerging technologies present significant 
hurdles for decision-makers tasked with their deployment. The process of selecting the most appropriate 
counter-drone systems for their specific missions involves a deep understanding of each system's 
capabilities, limitations, and operational requirements. Beyond selection, there is also a need to comprehend 
how best to integrate and employ these tools within existing security frameworks, which necessitates 
detailed planning for system placement, operational protocols, and personnel training to maximize 
effectiveness. 
Crucially, decision-makers must also anticipate and understand the circumstances under which their chosen 
systems might perform sub-optimally or even fail entirely. Simon Burton and Benjamin Herd from the 
Fraunhofer Institute for Cognitive Systems in Germany note that “the role of safety assurance can be seen as 
striving to facilitate decisions of type II wherever type I is not possible, whilst avoiding type III decisions” 
[2], in reference to Knight’s “three types of decisions: decisions under certainty (type I) where the 
consequences of all options are known; decisions under risk (type II) where possible futures are known, 
probability distributions are known, and statistical analysis is possible; and decisions under uncertainty (type 
III) where the future states are known but the probabilities are unknown” [8]. For decision-makers in defense
and security, these activities of safety assurance are also relevant to objectives outside of system safety, such
as the ability to complete the assigned mission, and mitigating the impact on manpower and materiel in
operations should complications arise; recognizing these potential shortcomings is vital for designing
redundancy in mission-critical systems, and robust contingency plans. These workarounds might involve the
deployment of alternative tools, such as different sensor types or kinetic countermeasures, or the devising of
innovative operational strategies that leverage human intervention or other available resources to compensate
for system limitations.
Any proposed counter-drone solution, whether a standalone system or a combination of technologies and 
operational procedures, must undergo a comprehensive assessment of its associated costs and risks. This 
includes not only financial and manpower investments in procurement, maintenance and operations, but also 
the potential for collateral damage, legal implications, and public perception. The objective is to arrive at a 
suitable outcome that effectively mitigates drone-related threats while ensuring overall mission success. 
Therefore, there is a clear imperative to establish a performance measure for these counter-drone systems, 
especially for stochastic elements within them such as CV or other AI models. This performance 
1A.03 - 2
STO-MP-IST-210

[Page 3 / 34 | chars: 2478]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
measurement framework should assess the accuracy, speed, and reliability of CV algorithms in identifying 
and tracking drones under diverse and challenging conditions, and allow for objective comparisons between 
different systems, enabling informed decisions and fostering continuous improvement in counter-drone 
technology. 
2.1 
Complexity of Performance Measurement in Networked, Inter-dependent Counter-
Drone Systems 
 
Figure 1: ASUL being presented at BAAINBw in Koblenz. Image was released by the 
 
Bundeswehr for public distribution.
Measuring the performance of CV systems for counter-drone missions can be a complex and multi-
faceted subject. Firstly, contained counter-drone systems are themselves becoming significantly more 
complex, comprising a mix of sensors, effectors, and coordination and processing software, in order 
to match the complexity and diversity of the range of threats they are required to face. For example, 
the Bundeswehr announced in Aug 2022 its deployment of the ASUL counter-drone system, highlighting 
its components [1]: “the sensor system… is composed of… three radars and a camera system with day and 
night vision. A radio frequency (RF) direction finder used to identify control signals and, if possible, also 
locate the position of the drone pilot… Once an aircraft has been detected by the radars and the 
direction finder, the system will compare its data with information available from data bases. In such a 
way, the system determines whether the aircraft could be a drone. After an alleged target has been 
detected, the system’s operator will be informed in real time and will be able to verify, with the help 
of the camera system, if the drone is to be classified as a threat.” While the exact specifications and 
workflows of the system are classified, within one counter-drone system, there is already a variety of 
visual data generated through its radar, electro-optical sensor, and thermal sensors. The system will 
likely also be engineered to handle the inherent variability in size, speed, materials, behavior, and 
payloads of various adversary drones of differing signatures, and function across a range of 
environmental conditions including electromagnetic interference and expected weather phenomena 
(sunlight, moonlight, rain, fog, or snow), and have differing levels of tolerance and 
STO-MP-IST-210
1A.03 - 3

[Page 4 / 34 | chars: 1806]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

redundancy built into its complementary sensor suites. It is likely that all these factors affecting ASUL’s 
success in deployment would have been specified through months of painstaking procurement requirements 
development and evaluation along these dimensions to ensure its ability to meet the Bundeswehr’s counter-
drone defense missions. Table 1 highlights a comparison of the key advantages and limitations of different 
modalities for drone detection, classification, and tracking, showing the complexity of architecting multi-
modal sensors. 
 
Table 1: Key Advantages and Limitations of Different Modalities for Drone Detection, 
 
Classification, and Tracking. 
Modality 
Key Advantages 
Key Limitations 
RF- 
based 
•
High accuracy in controlled
environments
•
Effective
for 
UAV 
identification 
and 
flight 
mode classification 
•
Effective range theoretically
scales to sensor sensitivity
•
Cost-effective and can detect
multiple drones/controllers
•
Susceptible to radio congestion and
jamming
•
Completely 
ineffective 
against
autonomous drones without active RF
links, 
or 
controlled 
drones 
in
autonomous modes
•
Requires prior knowledge 
of 
RF
frequencies in use by potential UAVs,
and other unrelated urban sources of RF
clutter
Audio- 
based 
•
Detects drones based on rotor
noise and acoustic signatures
•
Effective for autonomous
drones
•
Can operate outside line-of-
sight limitations
•
Mobile and quick to deploy
•
Performance degrades significantly in
high-noise or windy environments
•
Typically very short range due to
soundwave propagation characteristics
(300-500m)
•
Short range limits coverage for large
areas
•
Some drones designed to operate
silently
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision 
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
1A.03 - 4
STO-MP-IST-210

[Page 5 / 34 | chars: 2420]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Radar- 
based 
•
Resilient 
under
low 
visibility/weather conditions  
•
Uses
micro-Doppler 
signatures
•
Long 
range, 
constant 
tracking, accurate positioning  
•
Able to handle many objects
simultaneously
•
Able to detect any flying
object with radar signature
regardless of its operating
modality
•
Higher hardware costs and calibration
demands
•
Many systems lack resolution for very
small drones
•
Active emitting nature of sensors adds
complexity and licensing requirements
•
“Dead zones” due to curvature of the
earth and undulating terrain features
•
Clutter interference in urban/dense
environments
•
Integration 
complexity 
with 
other
sensors
Vision- 
based 
•
Targets UAV recognition via
optical images
•
Provides visuals for forensic
evidence
•
Real-time and cost-effective
solutions
•
Promising 
rapid
enhancement by advances in
AI and CV, and consumer-
grade 
image 
capturing
technologies
•
High false-alarm rates due to 2-
dimensional nature of returns
•
Environmental 
variability 
(light,
weather, obscurants) significantly affect
performance consistency
•
Challenges with small object size and
motion blur
•
High computational demands for high-
resolution streams
•
Relies on line-of-sight, vulnerable to
camouflage and obfuscation
Multi- 
Modal 
Fusion 
•
Mitigates single-sensor blind
spots
•
Significantly 
improves 
robustness and accuracy   
•
Crucial 
for 
small-object 
detection and erratic flight 
•
Adaptive sensor weighting
and 
deep 
embedding
methods
•
Increases 
complexity 
in 
real-time
deployment
•
Requires precise sensor calibration and
synchronization
•
Consumes power and bandwidth for
large-scale deployments
•
System integration complexity and cost,
including data synchronization and
fusion protocol standardization
•
Requires 
significant 
computational
resources or hardware optimisation for
real-time processing on edge devices
Second, in networked warfighting, each of these systems are likely to be embedded into larger systems-of-
systems operating across the tactical, operational and theatre level. This is because each sensor modality has 
inherent limitations as highlighted in Table 1: for example, radar may struggle with small, low-flying 
drones, optical cameras can confuse drones with birds, and RF direction finders are ineffective against 
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
STO-MP-IST-210
1A.03 - 5

[Page 6 / 34 | chars: 4940]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

autonomous drones that do not rely on a control link, and ‘go dark’, i.e. stop broadcasting signals. ASUL’s 
design incorporating a mix of sensors to compensate for each individual sensor’s limitations is an example of 
attempting to overcome this problem at the platform level. However, platform-level limitations may still 
exist, such as the ability to identify whether drones are friendly or hostile without an external validation 
system with additional Identify-Friend-or-Foe (IFF) information. Moreover, handling of both false positives 
(identifying non-drones as threats) and false negatives (failing to detect actual threats) may require decision-
making capabilities beyond the operators and systems on this platform, within the short response window 
typical for aerial threats, may require integration with Command, Control, Computers, Communications, 
Intelligence & Technology (C4IT) systems available on base to ensure decision-makers are able to take the 
best action based on the most complete set of available information. Since any CV tool would ultimately 
form part of a broader defense system, it would be irrational to expect that any system component should 
bear full responsibility for the ultimate outcome. Hence, the focus turns to selecting a suitable set of criteria 
for performance of individual system components, which inevitably runs into the question of what ‘good 
enough’ performance would entail. 
Third, CV systems leveraging machine learning methods exhibit stochasticity in their outputs when deployed 
in the real world because of the ways through which machine learning (ML) algorithms are generated, 
involving stochasticity in data generation, modelling, and optimization. As noted by Sabuncu [12]: 
“stochasticity features in many ML methods, affording them robustness, generalizability, and calibration”. 
However, he also notes that, “the large degree of uncertainty means we have a strong distinction between the 
data used to develop a model (often called training data) and the data used to objectively assess performance 
(the validation and test datasets), sometimes under different conditions. Most ML models exhibit poorer 
performance on independent data than on training data - a phenomenon called overfitting. Overfitting, or the 
generalization gap (performance difference between training and test data), is one of the core challenges of 
ML.” Burton and Herd (ibid.) asserts that uncertainty arising from attempting to assure such applications 
“can thus manifest itself as a lack of knowledge of the difference between the estimated failure rate … and 
the actual failure rate that occurs during operation. This “assurance gap” will typically need to be closed 
based on a combination of quantitative (e.g., related to statistical confidence) and qualitative arguments (e.g., 
based on the appropriateness of certain assumptions). [2]” Hence, the evaluation of CV systems should aim 
not to provide a definitive and deterministic view of how they would perform in deployment, but rather 
provide a sufficient confidence in having a stochastic outcome that would be acceptable given the level of 
risk tolerated by their employers. The attendant methodology must thus consider having sufficient and 
diverse test points to fulfil the requirements for such statistical confidence. 
2.2 
Limitations of Existing Methods 
Existing evaluation methods for CV systems, particularly in critical applications like counter-drone 
technology, present significant limitations. Current approaches primarily rely on two main categories: public 
benchmarks and organization or project-centric evaluations. Each of these methods, while offering some 
benefits, comes with inherent problems that hinder a comprehensive and trustworthy assessment framework. 
Public benchmarks offer a transparent view of CV system performance across a standardized dataset but 
have seen limited growth in adoption thus far. On the other hand, organization/project-centric evaluations 
presumably generate higher impact for their sponsoring organizations but are rarely disclosed to other 
ecosystem stakeholders outside the project or organization due to confidentiality or security considerations.  
2.2.1 
Approach and Limitations of Public Benchmarks 
Public benchmarks attempt to provide a standardized platform for comparison across different algorithms 
and models, often with the intention of furthering research and development in this space through convening 
different research groups to optimise their algorithms along a similar baseline and dataset. Yifei Dong et al. 
found in a seminal comprehensive literature review a wide-ranging overview of the benchmarking landscape 
benchmarks with single and multi-modal datasets ranging across electro-optical red-green-blue (EO/RGB), 
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision 
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
1A.03 - 6
STO-MP-IST-210

[Page 7 / 34 | chars: 3008]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

radio frequency (RF), audio, Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) data [5]: “Foundational benchmarks 
such as FL-Drones, NPS-Drones, and USC Drone provided core RGB datasets for aerial detection and 
tracking. Beyond the visual domain, DroneRF captures electromagnetic signatures for RF-based UAV 
classification, while DroneAudio and Acoustic-UAV focus on acoustic features. More recent efforts extend 
coverage to multi-modal data: Halmstad Drone fuses RGB, IR, and audio, and MMAUD integrates radar and 
LiDAR. Community-driven competitions (e.g., the 2nd and 3rd Anti-UAV Workshops and the 4th Anti-
UAV Challenge) feature adversarial or cluttered scenarios that reflect real world operational complexity, 
while UAVSwarm and mDrone emphasize large-scale swarm coordination or low-visibility tracking—both 
highlighting the need for robust multi-sensor fusion.” 
However, public datasets often suffer from several issues. One, the current state of benchmarking, while 
foundational, is characterized by critical deficiencies, particularly concerning annotation standards. Without 
discrediting the hard work and innovative approaches of their originators, many of these datasets are 
developed and maintained on a voluntary basis by researchers and graduate students, data quality can vary 
significantly. Moreover, many such large datasets were created with the use of popular foundational CV 
models such as YOLO, creating a feedback loop of poor open-source training data, leading to suboptimal 
models, leading to substandard labelling which finds its way back into poor open-source training data. 
Although no firm statistics are available on the prevalence of these data inconsistencies, Koksal et al noted in 
2020 at the 1st Anti-UAV Workshop and Challenge [9] that “such approaches might result in erroneous 
annotations”, and found in some experiments that such “annotation errors degrades the performance 
[severely]..., especially for missing boxes”, proposing to correct the benchmark challenge’s annotations 
where they found mistakes. The mislabelling that occurs often erodes trust in the dataset and contributes to 
varying levels of measurement error when models are tested on them. See Figure 2. 
 
Figure 2. Examples of mislabelled data in public UAV-related benchmarks. Top left: label applied 
 
where there is no UAV in the image, Anti-UAV300 dataset. Top right: label applied to a part of the 
 
image in which the UAV is not (actual UAV is on the left of the bounding box), Anti-UAV300 
 
dataset. Bottom two: UAVs present but unlabelled within image, DUT Anti-UAV Detection and 
 
Tracking dataset. Inconsistencies discovered by Resaro Research, 7 Jul 2025. 
Two, public datasets may not accurately reflect real-world operational environments, leading to a 
dataset bias where models perform well on the benchmark but poorly in deployed scenarios. For instance, 
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
STO-MP-IST-210
1A.03 - 7

[Page 8 / 34 | chars: 2082]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

in some of the foundational public datasets mentioned above that rely on often openly available data
scraped from social media or search engines, there is a significant mismatch in image context as compared 
to common use cases found in defense and security, as these tend to highlight drone flying or 
experimentation in recreational or civilian contexts. Moreover, when the sensor type and specifications 
are considered, further issues may arise relating to domain adaptation as model performance tested on 
these benchmarks may not translate into similar performance in defense and security contexts, with 
military-grade sensors. See Figures 3 and 4 for examples of the difference in data relevance and quality 
across these benchmarks. 
Figure 3: Examples of images from the USC Drone dataset. Note the high quality, good focus 
and good contrast present in some of the optical images which suggest that they may have 
been captured either by modern smartphones or photography enthusiasts from a stabilized 
imaging platform. 
Three, these benchmarks are often static and may not evolve at the same pace as the rapid advancements 
in computer vision or the emergence of new threats. As new and customized drones and tactics emerge 
on the battlefields of Ukraine and elsewhere, there is typically a significant lag experienced before their 
inclusion into public benchmarking datasets. In 2025, this implies that datasets specifically do not 
contain sufficient 
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision 
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
1A.03 - 8
STO-MP-IST-210
Figure 4: Examples of imagery from the 4th Anti-UAV Workshop dataset, which are examples of 
datasets more likely to be reflective of real-world scenarios encountered by sensors in defense 
and security. However, note also the sensor artifacts present (Chinese characters, crosshair 
boxes, date and timestamps); these artifacts may differ greatly across sensor types, especially 
those that do not operate directly on raw sensor feeds, and may corrupt measures of model 
performance in testing.

[Page 9 / 34 | chars: 4980]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

images and videos containing multiple UAVs operating in a swarm or otherwise, or armed UAVs, and lack 
representations of adversarial behavior or other potential deployment, as Yifei Dong et. al (ibid.) noted in 
their comprehensive review of benchmarks [5]: ‘analysis of representative datasets revealed gaps in 
adversarial robustness and scalable swarm tracking.” 
Another structural critique of public benchmarks is also noteworthy here as the modality of these 
benchmarks, being public in nature, can also encourage researchers to overfit to specific datasets rather than 
fostering robust and generalizable solutions. While there is no precise evidence that this is occurring on 
UAV-specific benchmarks, Singh et al. have confirmed the advantage of ‘gaming’ such benchmarks through 
real world experiments on an LLM benchmark, Chatbot Arena, through selective reporting of results. [13] 
They note that ‘undisclosed testing policy permits preferred providers to bias reporting of results’, where ‘a 
small group of preferred providers… test multiple models privately and only submit the score of the final 
preferred version’, and that such ‘selective disclosure violates [the central] unbiased sampling 
assumption...which systematically inflates model rankings, distorting the leaderboard ranking”. In any case, 
when multiple submissions are allowed and some stochasticity is inherent within the results, the best version 
of each developer team’s models rise to the top of the leaderboards and obfuscate a more comprehensive 
view of their overall performance. On UAV-specific benchmarks for researchers with arguably lower stakes, 
the existence of the incentive itself may indicate such activity ongoing – for example, on the premier 
benchmark, the 4th Anti-UAV Workshop, the top 3 winners across the participants in 3 distinct tracks 
(detection, classification, and multi-drone tracking) had each submitted between 8 - 29 entries before 
achieving their distinction, suggesting evidence of such phenomenon in effect. Note that up to 100 
submissions were permitted under this benchmark’s rules. 
2.2.2 
Limitations of Organization and Project-Centric Evaluations of CV Systems 
The above issues of public benchmarks are presumably well-known by organizations seeking to deploy or 
procure AI and CV in their products and services, especially defense, security and intelligence agencies with 
a keen interest in applying these technologies to their vast collection of operational data. However, they face 
another problem of data sensitivity, as well as the often extremely specialized and under-represented nature 
of their use cases, which prevent them from sharing this data in partnerships with broader benchmark 
providers. Hence, the organizations Resaro work with often turn to independent internal evaluations, which 
tend to be project or use-case centric, and are certainly restricted to their own organizations even if there are 
attempts to propagate their use through establishing internal leaderboards or benchmarks. While these 
internal evaluations may be well-tailored for the specific operational requirements of their designers, they 
also present their limitations.  
First, their bespoke nature means that they can be much more resource-intensive and time-consuming, 
hindering agile development and development cycles. Even in the case of the United States, with an 
extremely technologically advanced military, and sophisticated defense industrial base and with many 
notable past AI breakthroughs, testing and evaluation remains a problem that requires long timelines. The 
inaugural director of the DOD’s Joint Artificial Intelligence Center (JAIC) Retired Air Force Lt. Gen. John 
“Jack” Shanahan noted at the virtual event at the Center for New American Security titled “Safe and 
Effective: Advancing Department of Defense Test and Evaluation for AI and Autonomous Systems” [19] 
that the Pentagon “is not well postured yet” for testing and evaluation, or T&E, “of artificial intelligence, or 
any other kind of cutting edge software that requires continuous updating… under the conditions of 
combat… people have a vested interest in coming after and making your models not work the way you want 
them to work. You have explosions, you have fog, you have day, you have night… even though [our past 
models] were trained with operational data, once you put them in the operational environment, sometimes 
they’re just not gonna work the way you want them to work.” He went on to note that the DOD would “have 
got to get used to the fact that these updates [of AI models, to take into account changing operational 
conditions] may be happening in hours and days, not months and years.” The development of each internal 
evaluation of a CV system typically involves a business case or use case analysis, the creation of 
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
STO-MP-IST-210
1A.03 - 9

[Page 10 / 34 | chars: 4459]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

operationally-relevant metrics, translation into technical standards and metrics, testing on sparse internal 
datasets, live open-world testing where applicable, and the creation of customized reports in alignment with 
the expectations of various stakeholders’ from governance, technical, compliance, procurement and strategic 
teams. 
Second, their restrictive nature means they often lack the transparency and independent scrutiny found in 
public benchmarks, potentially leading to biased or incomplete assessments. The results from these 
evaluations are typically not publicly shared, making it difficult for the broader community to learn from 
successes and failures, nor critique the methodology. Even in the rare cases that these evaluation results may 
be shared, such as between allied nations’ militaries, the lack of uniformity in evaluation standards limit the 
ability of partner militaries to accept and understand their counterparts’ evaluations in relation to their unique 
context and data.  
2.3 
Relevance to Symposium Topics and NATO Allied Military Systems 
The approach we propose relates directly to the IST-210 Symposium’s topics of “AI assurance frameworks, 
standards, terminology and metrics”, and “AI risk and vulnerability assessment, including mitigation” by 
proposing a framework to ensure the reliability and trustworthiness of CV models, thereby mitigating 
significant AI risks and vulnerabilities in critical military applications. Recent efforts such as CEN-
CENELEC’s CWA 18150 CEN Workshop Agreement on “Unmanned aircraft systems - Counter UAS-
Testing methodology”, published in Oct 2024, have further established some common scenarios and 
standards relevant to counter-UAS operations undertaken by defense and security agencies [3]. We attempt 
to expand on them further by describing the approach to test, measure, and verify counter-UAS CV software 
against these scenarios and standards. Our approach directly contributes to the development of a common 
lexicon and AI assurance framework by outlining criteria for creating robust internal reference datasets, 
quantifying their properties (including approaches to qualify hard-to-detect targets), and introducing 
comprehensive pre-deployment testing checklists. While the test data can remain classified to each 
organization, the framework, toolkits, and pre-deployment testing checklists can be shared across each 
organization and establish a common basis for communicating the performance of counter-drone CV 
systems of interest across allied members. We will demonstrate how highly contextualized, use-case-specific 
internal benchmarks can be developed to compare models in a standardized manner, providing essential 
metrics for performance evaluation. Through this work, we aim to simplify and scale automated testing, 
identify weak performance spots, and provide decision-makers with clear go/no-go criteria for deploying CV 
models. The desired outcome is to bridge the testing gap and foster trust in these critical technologies, 
directly supporting the development and management of NATO Allied Military Systems in the crucial 
domain of counter-drone solutions throughout their life cycle. It will also enhance interoperability, and 
facilitate information-sharing, through providing a common frame of reference across like-minded defense 
agencies evaluating perception software used in counter-drone solutions.  
3.0 DESCRIPTION 
3.1 
Outline of Proposed Approach 
Given these challenges, we propose a novel approach that aims to combine the best aspects of both public 
benchmarks and organization/project-centric evaluations while minimizing the limitations of each. Our 
objective is to create a common comprehensive, trustworthy, and adaptable framework for assessing CV in 
counter-drone systems, providing a common baseline for comparing commercial solutions. This framework 
would come with a set of toolkits to evaluate data and models along specific dimensions, generate data to 
augment test data, and also allow users like NATO allied militaries to keep their classified datasets within 
their systems and protect their data, but also allow sharing of their scenario characteristics, synthetic data, or 
discoveries about theirs or vendors’ model behaviors to selective partners under broad information-sharing 
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision 
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
1A.03 - 10
STO-MP-IST-210

[Page 11 / 34 | chars: 4095]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

agreements. This integrated approach seeks to leverage the standardized comparison attributes of public 
benchmarks while incorporating the real-world relevance and specificity of tailored evaluations.  
In our approach, we will define the dimensions of quality on which a counter-drone CV system would be 
tested, collect real-world data relating electro-optical and infra-red imagery and relevant to defense 
scenarios, augment the test data with simulation-generated data where gaps are identified, and test these 
systems against the abovementioned dimensions of quality. Over time, our approach aims to discover, 
standardize, and parameterize – as a set of stable common scenarios, data and simulation objects – an 
emerging standard for CV evaluation in counter-drone and other similar mission sets, to further strengthen 
and align a common community of practice in counter-drone system evaluation. Any evaluation approach 
aiming for comprehensiveness, precision, and at the right granularity requires a solution along three general 
axes of effort: creating a robust methodology that pre-empts potential insufficiencies in knowledge about the 
system under test, collecting and curating a dataset that is proven sufficient in coverage of possible scenarios, 
and developing a means of dynamically updating the test library’s scenarios and datasets when they are 
found to be insufficient ex post, as testers are likely to discover new scenarios of interest or testing 
dimensions not previously considered. 
3.1.1 
AI Solutions Quality Index 
The methodology of our approach is based on an AI Solutions Quality Index™ (ASQI), which defines and 
establishes different dimensions of quality on which the CV system in the counter-drone system or its 
components should be assessed on, across drone detection, classification, and tracking tasks, to varying 
degrees of challenging operational conditions (e.g. low-light environments or unstable imaging platforms). 
This ASQI™ sets out the precise methodology for testing and evaluation, and frames the technical indicators 
required to qualify each performance dimension in relation to the higher-order operational objectives of the 
operational use case. These technical indicators, each backed by proprietary and open-source research, are 
then linked to the metrics to be used, and thresholds to be satisfied, to assess each dimension of performance 
accordingly.  This approach was first developed at the global scale and introduced in international 
standardization in 2019 (IEC SEG10) led by Dr. Sebastian Hallesleben et al. 
3.1.1.1 
Methodology for Constructing the ASQI 
The construction of effective quality indices for counter-drone CV systems follows six core principles 
specifically designed to support robust assurance case development:  
Use Case Specificity ensures that quality is defined within the context of requirements of deepfake detection 
in military applications, distinguishing between routine content screening and high-stakes intelligence 
verification scenarios while maintaining sufficient flexibility to address diverse operational contexts. 
Shared Language establishes terminology that bridges operational, governance, and technical stakeholder 
communities, enabling clear communication about quality requirements and system capabilities across 
organizational boundaries. 
Non-Binary Assessment recognizes that quality exists on a spectrum, with clearly distinguishable levels 
ranging from basic operational adequacy to state-of-the-art performance, allowing organizations to make 
informed trade-offs based on mission requirements and resource constraints. 
Independence Between Indicators safeguards the conceptual clarity and explanatory power of each 
indicator. It avoids artificial correlations that may mask unique patterns between indicators. This allows 
organisations to isolate the specific impact of each indicator without confounding influences from other 
indicators. 
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
STO-MP-IST-210
1A.03 - 11

[Page 12 / 34 | chars: 4639]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Technical Test Mapping ensures that each quality indicator corresponds to specific, automatable technical 
evaluations that can be independently validated and repeated as systems and threats evolve. 
Appropriate Granularity balances comprehensiveness with usability, providing sufficient detail to guide 
procurement and deployment decisions without overwhelming stakeholders with excessive complexity. 
Governance Framework Compatibility aligns quality indicators with established AI governance 
frameworks and defense defense requirements, ensuring that quality assessment supports broader 
compliance and risk management objectives.  
In the case of a CV system involved in the automated detection, classification and tracking of hostile drones, 
but connected as a subsystem to a broader drone defense system incorporating other sensor types, processing 
units, and counter-drone effector components, the ASQI would be useful as the basis of an “assurance 
module … able to handle the complexity of assuring an AI-enabled system by dividing it into parts that are 
more manageable to assure”, in line with recommended practices such as the DNV-RP-0671 
“Recommended Practice for Assurance of AI-enabled systems” published by the global independent 
assurance and risk management provider DNV.[4] Once we are able to visualize and explain the system’s 
behaviors along these categories of quality, our resulting documentation of the system’s demonstrated 
phenomena will form trust artifacts that can be referred to for assurance in various aspects of the safety and 
efficacy of the overall system.  
3.1.1.2 
Translating Desired Technical Qualities into Quantitative Metrics 
Thereafter, the desired technical qualities of the CV solution would have to then be translated into 
quantitative metrics, in order to construct observable parameters to quantify each test protocol and metric. To 
implement this, we model the deployment environment with three primary sources of variability that a CV 
system would have to perform under: at the sensor-level, the target-level, and the encapsulating environment. 
In so doing, we are able to break down the analysis components into understanding the following: detection 
and classification performance, referring to the ability of the system to detect and distinguish the expected 
variety of drones in the area of operations from other drones as well as other expected objects, tracking 
performance, referring to the ability of the system to keep track on a target of interest through time and space 
once identified. In so doing, we will have to further understand the above within more fine-grained 
contextual qualities such as system-to-target fit, referring to the ability of the system to operate well across 
targets of differing physical types or sizes, environmental robustness, referring to the ability of the system to 
consistently perform across the expected environmental conditions of its deployment, sensor behavior 
tolerance, referring to the ability of the system to consistently perform across the expected physical 
behaviors of the sensing platform, e.g. if it were deployed on a robotics or autonomous vehicle, and target 
behavior tolerance, referring to the ability of the system to operate well across targets’ positions and 
movement patterns as captured by the sensor.  
In this effort, the normalizability of parameters is vital, ensuring that performance scores can be scaled and 
compared consistently across different CV systems, sensor types, or operational environments. This allows 
for fair benchmarking and facilitates informed decision-making for procurement and integration, enabling a 
standardized language for evaluating diverse solutions within the counter-drone mission.  
Table 2 below highlights an indicative ASQI that could be deployed for a counter-drone use case. Within 
each operational parameter of interest, one or more metrics can then be developed or adapted from academic 
CV research, allowing for the ASQI’s indicators to be constantly updated by state-of-the-art measurement 
methods that are continually being investigated by the relevant data science communities in academia. For 
instance, overall tracking performance for an automated drone tracking CV system can be approximated by a 
metric like the Higher-Order Tracking Accuracy (developed by Luiten et al. [9]), a uniformly-blended score 
evaluating tracking along the three subtasks of detection, association and localization, using a Jaccard Index 
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision 
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
1A.03 - 12
STO-MP-IST-210

[Page 13 / 34 | chars: 2856]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

to calculate the intersection-over-union of the areas generated by a CV model predicting where the target is, 
compared to its ground truth. Taken in aggregate, these parameters aim to provide a positive rather than 
normative perspective of the CV system’s expected performance, to inform decision-makers deciding to 
procure or operate these systems against real-world adversaries. For a more granular view, the component 
parameters of Detection Accuracy, Association Accuracy, and Localization Accuracy can also be retrieved 
to understand where each model’s strengths and weaknesses are in tracking, as the developers of these 
models would also focus on different methods of fine tuning or hyperparameter optimization focusing on 
maximizing performance in certain desired aspects. As the creator of the HOTA Thomas Luiten noted, “very 
similar overall HOTA scores… [are revealed by] this plot…. that there is a clear difference in where one is 
better than the other… if you wanted to select a tracker for a particular application, you could now decide 
whether association or detection was more important for your application and pick the most appropriate 
tracker accordingly”. [11]  
Table 2. Testing a CV system for detection, classification, and tracking of drones. 
Use Case: Automated detection, classification, and tracking of hostile drones 
Category 
Technical Indicator 
Test Protocol and Metric 
Detection 
& 
Classification 
Performance 
Tendency of CV model to produce false alarms, e.g. 
producing detection reports of drones when birds fly 
across the field of view 
False Alarm Rate 
Tendency of CV model to miss detection of actual 
drone within field of view 
Missed Detection Rate 
Extent of ability of CV model to pick up presence 
of potential hostile drone upon capture in sensor 
field of view 
Detection Speed 
Extent of ability of CV model to correctly classify 
type of potentially hostile drone upon capture in 
sensor field of view 
Classification Speed 
Extent of ability of the CV model to detect and 
classify hostile drone of interest in general, across 
different confidence levels and object classes 
Overall Accuracy and Precision 
Tracking 
Performance 
Extent of ability of CV model to ‘track’ objects 
moving across video clips in real-world use cases, 
blending aspects of detection, association and 
localization accuracy within a single view 
Overall Tracking Accuracy 
Extent of ability of CV model to find objects within 
single images, independent of their identity or 
movement across frames 
Detection Accuracy 
Extent of ability of CV model to maintain the 
correct identity of an object across a sequence of 
frames, as opposed to confusion with other objects 
Association Accuracy 
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
STO-MP-IST-210
1A.03 - 13

[Page 14 / 34 | chars: 1562]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Extent of ability of CV model to consistently 
localize and track a target across multiple frames 
through aligning a predicted bounding box or 
tracker crosshair with its actual position 
Localization Accuracy 
Against more fine-grained contextual qualities such as: 
System-to-target 
fit 
Class-based performance differentials of above 
performance metrics, across differing drone sizes, to 
ensure CV model tested will perform evenly across 
drone types.  
Drone size tolerance 
Small (l x w x h < 2m3) 
Medium drones (2m3 < l x w x h < 
10m3) 
Large drones  (l x w x h > 10m3) 
Drone type tolerance 
Fixed-wing 
Rotary-wing 
Other 
Drone quantity tolerance 
Single 
Multiple/swarm 
Robustness 
to 
environmental 
factors 
Performance differentials of above performance 
metrics, under varying environmental conditions, 
that would be expected in the deployment 
environment of interest, to stress-test CV models 
prior to actual deployment in said environments 
Indoors, enclosed 
Partial occlusion 
Weather tolerance 
Rain 
Ambient light 
Fog & Mist 
Snow 
Backdrop tolerance 
Against cloud/sky 
Against urban  
Against foliage 
Sensor Behavior 
Tolerance 
Performance differentials of above performance 
metrics, across scenarios with varying sensor 
system behaviors, characteristics, and motion, to 
stress-test CV models prior to actual deployment in 
said scenarios 
Sensor jitter 
Sensor frame drops 
Image noise 
Sensor artifacts 
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision 
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
1A.03 - 14
STO-MP-IST-210

[Page 15 / 34 | chars: 3631]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Object/background blur 
Frames per second 
Target Behavior 
Tolerance 
Performance differentials of above performance 
metrics, across scenarios with varying target 
behaviors and motion, to stress-test CV models 
prior to actual deployment in said scenarios 
Fast/slow drone speed 
Near/far drone distance 
Drone aspect 
Drone payload/activity 
3.2 
Creating and Assessing Test Datasets for Static Perception Testing 
The objective of test dataset curation and creation is ensuring that a comprehensive mix of sensor, 
environmental, and target drone phenomena is represented to a sufficient degree to provide the end-user with 
assurance of sufficient test coverage for expected real-world phenomena. The data scientist’s judgement will 
have to be exercised during the curation of such a dataset, with a view to deciding on what images or videos 
would be relevant to the counter-drone use case.  
To that end, we curated a benchmark dataset, aggregating relevant data from our private drone video 
collection, the Anti-UAV300 [7] and Anti-UAV600 [21] datasets, and the multi-sensor drone detection 
dataset by Svanström et al. [16] as they were assessed to have representation of: defense or military contexts 
and imaging patterns (such as the cameras tracking drones overflying troops in the field), different relevant 
drone types, especially military-grade drones (such as the Geran-2 / HESA Shahed 136), flight profiles, and 
large corpus of infra-red sensors, with fields of view akin to real-world sensors deployed in ground-based 
drone defense settings, across differing environmental conditions. The initial benchmark dataset comprises 
two parts, designed to test CV models that would accept video input and/or single-frame input: a video 
dataset, comprising 121 self-collected videos captured under varying real-world UAV flight circumstances, 
and a video-derived image dataset, including both sampled frames from the videos and manually annotated 
single-frame captures, featuring diverse drone targets in a range of operational contexts. 
3.2.1 
Executing and evaluating the combinatorial testing method in a hypothetical scenario 
As an example, to illustrate the concepts in this paper, we designed a hypothetical scenario that would be of 
high relevance to a defense agency evaluating a counter-drone CV system. In this scenario, the sensors and 
attendant CV systems would be deployed ahead of a forward operating base, situated next to a previously 
evacuated small city on a relatively flat and open terrain with sparse forested areas of uncleared land. This 
hypothetical location is within range of a wide range of hostile adversary drones, across small (e.g. ZALA 
STO-MP-IST-210
1A.03 - 15
For both datasets, we also include data in its labels that reflect the above considerations and evaluate it for its 
distribution of imagery features such as color, light distribution, motion blur, and noise, as well as 
distribution of labels to ensure sufficient availability of target types, weather conditions, and terrain. Where 
the data distribution analysis showed that it was lacking in imagery features, we apply several types of 
processing including image blur, image lightning/darkening, and greyscale for the still image dataset, to even 
out the distribution. Specifically for the video dataset, we also further included cases where random frames 
would be removed from mid-clip to stress-test the robustness of object tracking algorithms to dropped 
frames. Thereafter, we reviewed the data with human expert vetting to remove images generated that would 
be impossible in real-world scenarios.

[Page 16 / 34 | chars: 3489]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Lancet) and medium (HESA Shahed 136 / Geran-2), while large drones (e.g. Kronshtadt Orion) will be 
detected and tracked by other radars within a layered air defense system. This system based on a stream of 
visual imagery from electro-optical sensors positioned at various locations will need to operate in low-light 
and bright conditions but will rely on other complementary radar and acoustic systems on dark nights, when 
visibility is low. We intend for this counter-drone CV system to not be actively monitored, but to issue a 
warning to on-duty operators when potentially hostile drones are detected. In so doing, we note the need to 
minimize false alarm rates to avoid operator fatigue, finely balanced against missed detection rates to ensure 
that hostile drones are not allowed through the ‘picket line’ and threaten valuable military assets in the rear. 
Hence, we select the following aspects of the above ASQI to set up a combinatorial testing approach, with 
the intention of evaluating the counter-drone CV system on the basis of false alarm rate, missed detection 
rates, and classification accuracy and precision, and answer the finer questions asked by our leadership: “will 
our potential vendors’ models perform consistently in all-weather, all-terrain scenarios?”, and “will our CV 
system perform consistently when different numbers and quantities of drones are encountered?”  The 
mathematical formulas used in the metrics for each of the above are as follows. 
3.2.1.2 
False Alarm Rate  
Here we find the number of instances of false positives (FP) where there was a drone detection within the 
image, where there was actually no drone. This rate is expressed as a percentage of the total number of 
positive instances where drones were detected, including correctly detected instances, or true positives (TP) 
through the formula 
. As the commonly used metric for Precision is 
, the False Alarm Rate can also be directly derived from subtracting the Precision metric 
from 1, or 
. 
3.2.1.2 
Missed Detection Rate  
Here we find the number of instances of false negatives (FN) where there was no drone detection within the 
image, when there was actually a drone present. This rate is expressed as a percentage of the total number of 
drones within all images, including correctly detected instances, or true positives (TP) through the formula 
. . As the commonly used metric for Recall is 
, the 
Missed Detection Rate can also be directly derived from subtracting the Recall metric from 1, or 
. 
3.2.1.3 
Overall Accuracy and Precision 
For this aspect of quality we use the mean average precision metric, or mAP, which provides an blended 
view of average precision (AP) across multiple classes i (in this case, small and medium-sized drones) 
through the formula 
, where AP is calculated by a summation of the area under the 
precision(P)-recall(R) curve for each class through the formula 
. Specifically for 
this project, we define the 
, meaning that for predicted bounding boxes that had at least a 
50% overlap with the ground truth bounding box (often indicating that at least half of the object of interest 
was detected), it would be counted as a TP. 
Table 3. Parameters and Possible Values for Combinatorial Coverage. 
Category 
Possible Values (Arbitrarily defined by evaluator 
based on expected operating conditions) 
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision 
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
1A.03 - 16
STO-MP-IST-210

[Page 17 / 34 | chars: 3046]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

System-to-Target Fit 
Drone Size 
Small (l x w x h < 2m3), Medium (l x w x h < 10m3) 
Drone Quantity 
Single, Multiple 
Sensor Behavior 
Image Noise 
Low, High 
Environmental 
Robustness 
Ambient Light 
Bright, Dark 
Backdrop 
Sky, Urban, Foliage 
The possible values each category can take in Table 3 are arbitrarily defined within this hypothetical scenario 
but should be adapted to the possible range of operational conditions in the desired deployment environment 
when this framework is employed in a real-world scenario. If we were to examine the robustness of the CV 
system under test individually under each parameter, and only produce results for each row, we may be 
unable to pick up possible blind spots on images containing more than one parameter of interest, e.g. images 
containing multiple small drones with high noise and dark ambient light. However, if we were to use every 
possible combination of parameters in testing, we would end up with a very large set of test cases which 
would be unlikely to be fulfilled by our collected dataset, and computationally prohibitive to generate 
otherwise. Hence, to simplify the resulting conversion of the above eleven test levels for the 5 parameters 
into test cases, we use pairwise subsets of the parameters, e.g. image noise vs. ambient light, to derive user 
friendly test tables. All possible parameter combinations would lead here to prod_{k = 1}^{d} n_d 
combinations, here 3* 2^4 = 48. 
We further assess that for some of the combinations involving medium drones, this is likely to be less of a 
concern given our scenario parameters as we are generally aware that medium-sized drones would likely 
tend to operate at a higher altitude and be used in medium-range strikes, unlike small hunter-killer FPV 
drones which might heavily utilize terrain masking to camouflage their movements. This is a frequently 
occurring problem, that not all theoretical possible combinations of the parameters are practically relevant 
and is handled by introducing constraints to the space of all parameter combinations. Hence, we drop the 
following combinations from consideration with the below considerations: 
Tuple 
Consideration for Exclusion from Test Case 
(Medium, Multiple) 
The evacuated city in our hypothetical scenario is not assessed to be 
likely to be significant enough to be targeted by large swarms of enemy 
medium-sized drones or loitering munitions. 
(Medium, Urban) 
Medium-sized drones would likely have higher operating altitudes in a 
strike mission, and the field-of-view coverage of our hypothetical 
sensor setup would not provide instances in which medium drones 
would be against urban or foliage scenery. 
(Medium, Foliage) 
Dropping combinations involving the above factors from consideration produces the following combinatorial 
coverage table of 27 combinations (Table 4). In order to provide some reasoning around reasonable sample 
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
STO-MP-IST-210
1A.03 - 17

[Page 18 / 34 | chars: 2686]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

sizes, hypothetical confidence intervals are added to the combinatorial table based on the available videos. In 
our reasoning, we construct a binomial data distribution for the object detection system, i.e. it either detected 
everything in an image/video correctly or it did not and further assume a perfect result reflecting that the 
object detection system did achieve its main objective in the cases we observed. We can then calculate a 
confidence interval for the pass rate, which reflects the uncertainty for similar performance to be observed in 
new videos from the same combination of parameters, even if empirically a system did perform perfectly for 
the known examples. This uncertainty is statistically reflected by the width of the confidence interval, which 
we generate using Wilson’s method for a one-sided confidence test for a 95% threshold, as implemented in 
the popular data science library scipy through the method BinomTestResult.proportion_ci. Examining the 
confidence interval (ci_low) in each scenario gives us an indication of where the test data may need to be 
further augmented, especially if certain scenarios are of higher mission importance. 
Table 4. Combinatorial coverage showing the number of observations (n_observations) and 
resulting confidence interval (ci_low) given the data available in the visual segment. Note that IR 
data was not included in this calculation as it does not contain context on the background and
considerations involving ambient light do not apply. Nonetheless, most of the IR data contains 
single small drones against a ‘sky’ backdrop.   
drone_size drone_quantity noise 
light 
background 
n_observed 
ci_low 
small 
single 
low 
bright 
urban 
20 
0.88 
small 
single 
low 
bright 
sky 
10 
0.79 
small 
single 
low 
bright 
foliage 
18 
0.87 
small 
single 
low 
dark 
urban 
5 
0.65 
small 
single 
low 
dark 
sky 
2 
0.43 
small 
single 
low 
dark 
foliage 
2 
0.43 
small 
single 
high 
bright 
urban 
107 
0.98 
small 
single 
high 
bright 
sky 
78 
0.97 
small 
single 
high 
bright 
foliage 
103 
0.97 
small 
single 
high 
dark 
urban 
43 
0.94 
small 
single 
high 
dark 
sky 
62 
0.96 
small 
single 
high 
dark 
foliage 
0 
0 
small 
multiple 
low 
bright 
urban 
2 
0.43 
small 
multiple 
low 
bright 
sky 
3 
0.53 
small 
multiple 
low 
bright 
foliage 
3 
0.53 
small 
multiple 
low 
dark 
urban 
0 
0 
small 
multiple 
low 
dark 
sky 
2 
0.43 
small 
multiple 
low 
dark 
foliage 
1 
0.27 
small 
multiple 
high 
bright 
urban 
0 
0 
small 
multiple 
high 
bright 
sky 
2 
0.43 
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision 
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
1A.03 - 18
STO-MP-IST-210

[Page 19 / 34 | chars: 3569]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

small 
multiple 
high 
bright 
foliage 
2 
0.43 
small 
multiple 
high 
dark 
urban 
0 
0 
small 
multiple 
high 
dark 
sky 
0 
0 
small 
multiple 
high 
dark 
foliage 
0 
0 
medium 
single 
low 
bright 
sky 
1 
0.27 
medium 
single 
low 
dark 
sky 
2 
0.43 
medium 
single 
high 
bright 
sky 
5 
0.65 
medium 
single 
high 
dark 
sky 
1 
0.27 
Evaluating performance across such a high-dimensional parameter space requires a strategic methodology. A 
simplistic approach of evaluating each parameter individually while holding others constant is insufficient, 
as it fails to account for the significant interaction effects that frequently occur. For instance, the performance 
impact of varying an object's distance is not independent of the ambient fog level or the camera's resolution; 
findings from one specific combination are not directly transferable to others. To address this complexity, 
methods from the field of Uncertainty Quantification (UQ) are utilized. [14] This involves a sophisticated 
toolbox of techniques, including space-filling Design of Experiments (DoE)—such as maximin Latin 
hypercubes—to strategically select a minimal yet informative set of parameter combinations for testing. 
Subsequently, modeling techniques like Gaussian Processes are employed to interpolate system performance 
and predict outcomes in untested regions of the parameter space and to perform sensitivity analysis, i.e. to 
learn which parameters are important to have a high impact on performance changes. The primary 
advantages of this UQ-based approach are its ability to efficiently determine input variable importance (e.g., 
quantifying whether an object's color significantly affects detection) and to identify the extremal points of 
performance, revealing the specific combination of parameters that result in best-case and worst-case 
scenarios, all while optimizing the collection and usage of simulation data and keeping the required number 
of simulation runs as low as possible. [15] Overall, while there are quite a few cases above in which there are 
insufficient test cases to have a high confidence in any results obtained, it is also cost-prohibitive to generate 
test cases for each of the areas of low confidence. To move further towards a reasonable test methodology, 
we can further condense the search space through incorporating expert judgement to identify the most 
significant pairwise combinations of dimensions to consider in our evaluation, therefore shrinking the search 
space from five original dimensions (drone size, drone quantity, noise, brightness, background) to two. This 
would also have the benefit of focusing the required generation of simulation scenarios to those areas that are 
lacking in data, reducing the overall computational complexity. 
The first pairwise combination to consider arises from the usage of the (background, light) tuple, which 
attempts to answer the potential question “will our CV system perform consistently in all-weather, all-terrain 
scenarios?” Given the number of observations in Table 5, we see that we have sufficient coverage to answer 
this question, with resulting confidence intervals ranging from 0.8 to 0.98. The lowest confidence interval at 
0.8 arises from there being only 11 instances of observed dark environments within foliage, which will be 
the focus of additional data generation, as well as any subsequent live trials conducted after this exercise. 
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
STO-MP-IST-210
1A.03 - 19

[Page 20 / 34 | chars: 2992]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

The second pairwise combination to consider arises from the usage of the (object_size, quantity) tuple, 
which attempts to answer the potential question “will our CV system perform consistently in detecting 
different numbers and quantities of drones?” Given the number of observations present in Table 6, we see 
that we have generally sufficient coverage to answer this question, with resulting confidence intervals 
ranging from 0.85 to 0.99, except for the scenario with multiple medium drones (with only 1 observation and 
a confidence interval of 0.27). However, in this case, we have already excluded such a consideration from 
the testing scope, as “the evacuated city in our hypothetical scenario is not assessed to be likely to be 
significant enough to be targeted by large swarms of enemy medium-sized drones or loitering munitions.” 
Hence, we will focus the efforts of simulating multiple small drones in the following simulation runs. 
Table 6. Pairwise coverage for (drone size, drone quantity) tuple.
We made the conscious decision to exclude the last factor, image noise, in considering pairwise coverage as 
the nature of noise exhibits significantly more continuous variability. Nonetheless, we will also address the 
effect of noise on model performance at a later stage, where we will holistically investigate the effect of 
noise across all 3 datasets to understand how it influences performance. 
3.2.2 
Establishing Simulation Environments for Data Collection & Dynamic Testing 
While a fixed set of still images and video data may be useful to establish a baseline understanding of CV 
system performance when given these inputs, clear limitations persist. These include the inability to: (a) 
evaluate counter-drone systems on dynamic adversary drone maneuvers and scenarios (e.g. multi-drone 
attack formations), (b) account for the full range and representation of realistic environmental phenomena in 
which they are expected to operate, where data is insufficient, (c) reproduce the idiosyncratic sensor 
behaviors where real data may not exist for sensors yet to be deployed, and (d) fully appreciate the terrain 
limitations of each sensor mode, especially including line-of-sight issues for optical cameras or terrain-
masking issues for IR or LIDAR sensors. Moreover, where the dataset distribution is not sufficient to support 
a representative weightage of the data for the actual use in the operational design domain, performance 
metrics on the dataset cannot be considered transferable to the actual usage scenario. For example, a drone 
dataset consisting of 80% of bright light, clear sky, no occlusion images/videos would not provide sufficient 
assurance of consistent CV system performance under an actual usage scenario in a winter setting, with 60% 
rainy conditions. 
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision 
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
1A.03 - 20
STO-MP-IST-210
Table 5. Pairwise coverage for (background, light) tuple.

[Page 21 / 34 | chars: 1807]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Hence, we created the third and final part of the benchmark dataset methodology, intended to generate the 
test cases deemed to be necessary but lacking in the above coverage analysis for any given curated dataset. 
This dataset will be created using a realistic simulation platform that will recreate the expected real-world 
operating environment, given a set of parameters relevant to the tester, and if necessary, with a reproduction 
of the relevant sensor in the actual simulation environment based on its technical specifications. For instance, 
as the above test coverage analysis revealed a need to focus on scenarios involving dark foliage 
environments, as well as multiple small drones, concrete simulation scenarios will be established with these 
parameters, and the ground truth and sensor outputs of these scenarios recorded into still images and videos 
as a test case. See Figure 5 for some examples. 
Another important advantage of the usage of a simulation to enhance and enlarge datasets is that  even 
after the conclusion of a test, iteratively new simulation runs can be added to search for points of 
weak performance for a system, allowing very specific criteria can be derived to identify and 
investigate edge cases, e.g. when an object detection system experiences catastrophic model failure due to 
partial occlusion of the target object by foliage. 
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
STO-MP-IST-210
1A.03 - 21
Figure 5. Some simulation scenarios focusing on a combination of darker 
environments, multiple small drones, and accompanying foliage as parameterized 
scenario variables. An advantage of generating data is the ability to generate 
ground-truth bounding boxes within images, economizing on labelling effort.

[Page 22 / 34 | chars: 4318]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

3.2.2.1 
Physics Engine & Required Modifications 
The Simulation Engine serves as a sophisticated platform for creating a digital representation of the real 
world that is able to generate diverse sensor data, including outputs from cameras, LIDAR, and infrared 
sensors, as well as realistic flight behavior of drone targets. Furthermore, the engine can dynamically adjust 
environmental conditions, simulating variations in light, weather, terrain, and the interactions between 
objects and the simulated environment bounded by a physics engine. 
Its versatility extends to configuring and executing a broad spectrum of missions. These range from logistical 
operations and Intelligence, Surveillance, and Reconnaissance (ISR) tasks to complex combat scenarios. A 
key feature is its ability to facilitate the isolated evaluation of specific subsystems. This allows for focused 
testing and refinement of components such as object detection algorithms or localization functionalities 
without the complexities of a full system integration.  
At its core, the Simulation Engine is built upon a detailed 3D representation of a map. Within this virtual 
world, objects possess realistic shapes, allowing for physical interactions such as collisions, for example, 
between a drone and an environmental object (e.g. a tree). These objects are also endowed with varying 
surface properties and colors, as well as their own interactions with other factors like light and wind, 
contributing to the visual fidelity of the simulation. Beyond static representation, the engine incorporates 
highly realistic physical behavior, including gravity and inertia, as well as different light and weather 
conditions, paying attention to intricate details like correct shadow rendering, which significantly enhances 
the visual realism. A high level of accuracy is maintained in representing actions and behaviors over time, 
ensuring that dynamic processes unfold realistically within the simulation. 
To enable the simulation of Counter-Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (CUAV) setups, the virtual physical world 
must be equipped with simulated sensor streams, as well as integration with real-world drone flight and 
systems control system software like PX4 or ArduPilot to replicate realistic drone system behaviors. A 
primary requirement is the generation of realistic camera data. Like real-world cameras, various settings can 
be precisely modified, beginning with fundamental parameters such as resolution, field of view, and different 
angles for pitch, yaw, and roll, as well as customizable camera positions. The level of detail extends to 
camera-specific characteristics, allowing for the simulation of image noise and intricate focus settings. 
Beyond camera sensor streams, the simulation offers a comprehensive array of other sensor telemetry that 
can be generated, extracted and analyzed, such as Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU) data, barometer 
readings, and GPS data. Furthermore, the engine can support the simulation of LIDAR and audio data, 
providing a holistic sensory input for comprehensive system testing and development in the virtual 
environment. 
3.2.2.2 
Variable Parameterization 
An integral part of the simulation design is the inclusion of a human-in-the-loop testing capability, enabling 
human operators to interact with and influence the highly configurable simulation environment. The 
simulation is engineered to be extensively parameterized across multiple domains, including diverse 
operational environments (e.g., an Australian desert versus a European city landscape) and variable 
atmospheric conditions such as light levels, wind, rain, and fog. Objects within the simulation can be 
systematically altered in terms of their position, pose, size, texture, and color, with the capability to 
incorporate new or modified objects via CAD files. The CUAV sensor suite itself is also subject to 
parameterization, allowing for variations in camera settings, resolution, position, pose, and field of view 
(FOV) as described above. 
3.2.2.3 
Data Collection & Processing 
The Data Processing component systematically captures all simulation data into rosbag files, extracting and 
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision 
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
1A.03 - 22
STO-MP-IST-210

[Page 23 / 34 | chars: 3162]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

structuring raw sensor streams, on-board drone information (e.g., object detection outputs, estimated 
localization), and crucial ground truth data (e.g., precise object bounding boxes, ground drone position and 
odometry data), and relating them to preset pipelines for calculating metrics, and data queries. This enables 
detailed, objective comparisons to quantify system performance. The pipeline is designed to also handle real-
world data in place of simulation data streams, helping to bridge the "simulation-to-real" gap in cases where 
real-world sensor streams are available. 
3.2.3 
Visualization and Analysis 
Visualization and analysis involve a powerful engine that evaluates various performance metrics, including 
mission-specific criteria, object detection/tracking accuracy, localization accuracy, and maneuver precision. 
It translates these technical metrics into standardized AI System Quality Indices (ASQI), providing 
comparable and interpretable grades across different capability categories.  
In order to be able to do different types of analysis on the data generated as outlined in section 3.2.1, e.g. 
coverage analysis, all relevant metadata is also collected, which can include drone positions, headings, 
movement speed, as well as data on ambient conditions such as fog or rain settings. Results are presented on 
a front-end dashboard for clear decision-making but are also available as data artefacts for individual data 
analysis projects. 
3.2.4 
System Architecture, Result Storage and Retrieval 
The simulation platform is designed with a flexible architecture supporting both air-gapped on-premises 
deployment for sensitive projects, and cloud-based parallel processing for high-throughput analysis, as well 
as single-compute-instance use cases, and parallelized use cases for high throughput. Results are stored in a 
tamper-proof environment together with extensive documentation artefacts detailing the conditions and 
parameters of test scenarios, in relation to the data generated for each case. 
4.0 CONCLUSIONS 
4.1 
Dataset Review and Analysis of Proxy Model Results 
Having created 3 segments of our aggregated dataset, we now turn to evaluating the data and re-assessing the 
combinatorial coverage to ensure that our test methodology will deliver us sufficient visibility into the 
characteristics of the hypothetical CV system being tested.  
4.1.1 
Analysis of Test Data Quality and Distribution 
First, from the real-world data collected, we find a total number of 1269 videos, of which 766 are from IR 
sensors and 503 are from visual sensors. In particular, as we were aware from previous experience that the 
available open-source datasets referenced above lack significant representation of medium and large drones, 
extra effort had been put into the data collection process to manually acquire data relating to these drones by 
scraping popular websites and Telegram channels dedicated to coverage of drone strikes in the ongoing 
Russia-Ukraine conflict and Israel-Iran conflict. 
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
STO-MP-IST-210
1A.03 - 23

[Page 24 / 34 | chars: 2084]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

From the above, we find the dataset demonstrates a strong bias toward scenes involving small 
drones, particularly in the visual data segment. This overrepresentation leads to uneven coverage 
of other operationally relevant targets especially for defense use cases, where the system’s 
performance against medium-range threats such as loitering munitions and Class 2 attack UAVs may be 
relevant. The resulting imbalance may introduce dataset-driven inductive biases, potentially causing 
learned models to overfit to high-contrast or uncluttered settings, while underperforming in more 
complex real-world environments. 
Furthermore, within the data from electro-optical sensors (Figure 7), low-light (‘dark’) scenarios are 
notably underrepresented in the data and when present, are predominantly paired with small drones. 
The visual segment is overwhelmingly dominated by bright scenes, with bright images appearing across 
nearly all size and background categories. In contrast, dark scenes are both fewer in number and 
narrowly distributed, mostly involving small drones. Combinations involving medium-sized drones under 
dark lighting conditions are extremely sparse. This imbalance limits the evaluation of system robustness 
across illumination domains and may compromise performance generalization to real-world conditions 
that involve variable or degraded lighting, limiting the dataset’s ability to support evaluation of 
performance under low-light conditions. This would negatively impact confidence in the deployed CV 
system in the operational scenario discussed above if not addressed, as it opens operators up to unexpected 
risks that their CV system may malfunction and fail 
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision 
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
1A.03 - 24
STO-MP-IST-210
Figure 6. High-level analysis of representations in the real-world infra-red (IR) and electro-
optical/visual (EO) Dataset. 
Figure 7. Distribution of dataset representation in light condition (left) and drone quantity (right) 
in the electro-optical visual dataset.

[Page 25 / 34 | chars: 3528]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

to detect hostile drones in low-light scenarios such as at dawn, dusk, or on cloudy or winter days. 
Figure 8. Proprietary image noise analysis on EO/visual (left) and IR (right) datasets. 
Another point of consideration in evaluating the completeness of the datasets would be the introduction of 
general image noise under operational conditions, which may manifest through variations in sharpness, 
contrast, edges, entropy, and similarity of the target against its background. To that extent, we developed a 
proprietary metric to consider these manifestations of overall image noise which could make objects hard to 
detect in each image, called the Hard-to-Detect Score (HDS). The HDS takes into account a blended set of 
the above metrics, and produce a single score that would attempt to explain how likely it was that targets 
within said image would be hard to detect on a scale from 0-6; the lower the score, the more likely it is that 
targets within the image would be easier to detect, and the higher the score, the less likely. These scores were 
tested on our curated collections of real-world data across visual data from ground-based, airborne, and 
remote sensing imagery, with input from domain experts, to arrive at a confidence (R2 > 0.6) that it would 
have sufficient explanatory power to indicate if image noise was complicating object detection algorithms on 
said images. In Figure 8 above comparing the IR segment of the dataset (left), and the electro-optical/ visual 
segments (right), we observe that that the IR segments are on average less noisy (mode = 0), while the 
EO/visual segments are noisier (mode = 2); the latter also demonstrates more diversity in the levels of noise 
represented within the dataset. This suggests that any evaluation based on these datasets should account for 
the differences in confidence between the CV system under test under scenarios of noisy IR images. As our 
simulation platform is currently unable to simulate noisy IR data, we opted to apply random noise 
perturbations to a part of the IR dataset to raise the representation of noisy conditions. 
Overall, we weighted the sim dataset towards scenarios with ‘sky’ and ‘foliage’ backgrounds, ‘multiple’ and 
‘small, drones, as well as ‘dark’ lighting scenarios. After creating this simulation data to augment the parts 
lacking in real-world test data, the distribution and resulting confidence intervals are as below (Table 7), 
showing significant improvements in the ‘small-multiple’ category and ‘foliage-dark’ category. Note that in 
so doing, we had to employ some degree of bounded randomization to the parameters in the simulation, 
necessary for enhancing realism and select for instances where the drones would be captured performing 
‘organic’ maneuvers under realistic conditions. These led to natural limitations within the resource 
boundaries of this project in generating significant numbers of foliage-dark scenarios that would still have 
clearly visible drones within the test data, especially as foliage often led to complete occlusion, although the 
‘foliage-dark’ nonetheless showed considerable improvement. Combining all three segments of the dataset, 
we now have a benchmark with sufficient test coverage to test the hypothetical vendors’ models in question, 
and a framework through which we can link the results to our operational objectives through the ASQI.  
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
STO-MP-IST-210
1A.03 - 25

[Page 26 / 34 | chars: 2664]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

4.1.2 
Performance Differences and Insights across Data Segments for Drone Detection 
Algorithm  
To highlight how such a benchmark would enable a granular and robust investigation of even out-of-the-box, 
non-fine-tuned models, we employ the methods described above to examine if we are able to find the 
potential areas of underperformance of an Ultralytics YOLOE (Real-time Seeing Anything) model 
developed by Ao Wang, Lihao Liu, Hui Chen, Zijia Lin, Jungong Han, and Guiguang Ding. [18] YOLOE 
was designed for open-vocabulary detection and segmentation, and uses text, image, or internal vocabulary 
prompts, enabling real-time detection of any object class. It was selected as its developers were able to 
‘achieve state-of-the-art zero-shot performance with minimal impact on speed and accuracy’ and is likely to 
be archetypal of the architectures used in real-world counter-drone CV system development.  
We achieve the following overall results that show an overall mAP at 0.22 at the IoU threshold of 0.5 for the 
EO and augmented simulator dataset, and a score of 0.04 for the IR dataset. Further investigation into the 
metric split by bounding box areas shows that the model performs much better when the target within the 
image is large (at least 96 x 96 pixels), and the model has almost negligible performance on small targets (32 
x 32 pixels or smaller). Though unsurprising, this validates our hypothesis that there would be performance 
differences in the CV system across small and medium drones, as well as how far the drones would be 
detected away from the sensor, as further objects will appear as smaller given the same sensor field of view. 
Notably, as Wang et al. noted that YOLOE was largely trained on large COCO datasets and further grounded 
by Objects365 (V1) and GoldG datasets, we can infer that the model was not significantly exposed to infra-
red data. This hypothesis is supported by the below metrics showing negligible performance on the infra-red 
segment of our evaluation data. 
 
Table 8. Overall Accuracy & Precision Results for EO and simulator (left) dataset, and IR dataset 
 
(right). 
Moreover, observing the precision and recall statistics for each dataset reveals a difference in performance 
Classification Accuracy and Precision 
Area size (px) 
(EO) MAP@0.5 
(IR) MAP@0.5 
All 
0.22 
0.04 
Small (area < 322) 
0.01 
0.05 
Medium (322 < area < 962) 
0.28 
0.07 
Large (area < 962) 
0.55 
0.00 
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision 
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
1A.03 - 26
STO-MP-IST-210
Table 7. Improved confidence in test case coverage after augmentation by simulation outputs.

[Page 27 / 34 | chars: 3043]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

for the CV systems operating on EO and IR data (see Table 9). On the EO dataset, we observe a Missed 
Detection Rate of 63.8%, and a False Alarm Rate of 83.09%. On the IR dataset, we observe a Missed 
Detection Rate of 92.73%, and a False Alarm Rate of 65.65%. This shows that the CV system under test 
does provide a significantly lower false alarm rate on IR data, but at the cost of missing almost all the drones 
in the images. Again, this is not surprising given that open-source ‘world’ models tend to be optimized for 
full-color images, as described in earlier sections, therefore leading to significant performance degradation 
when applied to IR use cases even when fine-tuning is applied. Notwithstanding that, note we did not fine-
tune the model in this case. 
 
Table 9. Missed Detection Rate and False Alarm Rate Results for EO and IR datasets (without 
 
IoU threshold). 
GT count (# 
of drones) 
Missed (# of 
drones) 
Predicted 
(# 
of drones) 
Missed 
Detection 
Rate (%) 
False 
Alarm 
Rate (%) 
EO 
dataset 
489 
312 
988 
63.80 
83.09 
IR dataset 619 
574 
131 
92.73 
65.65 
4.1.3 
Insights into performance differences across scenarios 
Further, we also observe clear performance differences for the tested model operating under ideal conditions 
as compared to more challenging conditions, as we may observe further degradation in its drone detection 
capabilities in the presence of compression noise, differing brightness conditions, and detection of 
single/multiple drones as detailed in our test cases above. We further investigate its performance within 
different levels of these categories and arrive at the following results. 
4.1.3.1 
Performance differences between test cases of different background-light combinations 
From examining the data in Table 10, scenarios containing generally dark environments cause the CV 
system to perform poorly, with the lowest mAPs as a group ranging from 0.02 to 0.03 (sky/urban/foliage, 
dark), and at a generally high confidence level. Of the three environments, the foliage background also 
produces the worst results, with mAP ranging from 0.02 - 0.03. Notably, the CV system seemed to perform 
its best under (sky, bright), (urban, bright) scenarios, with mAP at 0.63 and 0.51 respectively with a 
confidence interval of 98% and above. This suggests that the CV system’s ability to perform under these 
conditions, even in the real-world, would be expected to be rather stable under ideal conditions, but may be 
prone to sudden and significant performance degradation should these conditions change (e.g. in an 
incoming storm, when clouds rapidly form and crowd out sunlight). A professional evaluation of such a 
system in our hypothetical scenario would consider the weather patterns, overall lighting conditions in 
various seasons within a temperature climate and design the appropriate safeguards and risk mitigation 
measures accordingly. 
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
STO-MP-IST-210
1A.03 - 27

[Page 28 / 34 | chars: 3213]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Going deeper into exploring the best performing sky-bright test cases in Table 10, we see that there is a 
significant drop-off in performance across smaller object sizes that reinforces the overall initial analysis that 
the model does not perform well in situations with drones that present as a small (i.e. < 32 x 32 pixels) target, 
either due to it being a small drone or far away from the sensor. Although range was not one of the initial 
considerations when scoping this series of test cases, we find further support for the hypothesis that this 
system does not perform well on small objects and may need to further investigate the effects on performance 
by varying drone distance from the sensor, perhaps through live testing to understand the limits of detection. 
Table 11. Performance by object size, within the sky-bright pairwise scenarios. 
4.1.3.2 
Performance differences between test cases of different object size-quantity combinations 
On the second pairwise combination of drone size and quantity, we find that the best performance was 
observed in the test cases with single, small drones with mAP at 0.25, at a very high confidence (confidence 
interval > 0.99). We also find that the worst performance was on single medium drones at 0.01 mAP, with a 
confidence interval of >0.94, while multiple small drones are not far off at an mAP of 0.03. This lends 
weight to our initial concerns of models not being optimized for medium, and multiple drones, as these 
foundational models lack training data for these features and typically do not account for multiple drones in 
an image, due to the majority of their training data corpus involving single-target, close-up images. We also 
observe an interesting trend across all three cases, where measured recall is consistently higher than 
precision. For the best-performing scenarios with single small drones, recall was at 0.4 (leading to a Missed 
Detection Rate of 60%) while precision was at 0.19, (leading to a False Alarm Rate of 81%). While this 
means that missed detections are less likely than false alarms, it would also suggest that the directionality of 
current model hyperparameters lead to a trade-off in favor of recall at the cost of precision. As noted earlier, 
any further fine-tuning would lead to real trade-offs in one or more performance dimensions; the counter-
drone CV system evaluators in our hypothetical scenario would need to note these trends before and after 
fine-tuning and design the necessary engineering and operational workarounds that would account for these 
trade-offs while preserving their benefits. In the case of a system with a high number of false alarms, and a 
relatively lower missed detection rate, options to consider include further heuristic-based suppression 
mechanisms could be employed to reduce ‘alarm fatigue’ for human operators, or dedicated operational roles 
implemented to investigate and suppress false alarms while escalating genuine alarms.  
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision 
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
1A.03 - 28
STO-MP-IST-210
Table 10. Relative results across different combinations of background/light factors across 
visual dataset.

[Page 29 / 34 | chars: 2579]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Table 12. Relative results across different combinations of drone size and drone quantity factors 
across visual dataset. 
4.1.3.3 
Impact of image noise on performance 
In measuring the impact of image noise on performance, we first discounted the IR dataset as its overall 
performance was way too low to obtain meaningful results from analyzing the sub-dataset differences in 
noise profile. For the EO dataset, we assigned each ground-truth object a noise score based on high-
frequency variance: variance(patch - GaussianBlur(patch)). This quantifies texture and graininess in the 
object region. Based on this score, objects are classified into the following categories: 
Low: Variance < 100.0 – smooth, low-noise regions. 
Medium: 100.0 ≤ Variance < 400.0 – moderate noise or texture. 
High: Variance ≥ 400.0 – strong texture or high noise presence. 
We then assess the standard detection metrics (Recall, Precision, F1, Mean IoU), along with the number of 
Low, Medium, and High noise objects per class. Classes are ranked by the number of ground-truth objects 
(NumGT), limited to the top-k if specified. For each chart, we compare performance between low-
noise/medium-noise/base-noise objects and their non-low counterparts. Metrics were computed using the 
same set of predictions. It is clear that there is significant drop-off in performance when the level of noise in 
an image increases, to the extent that in this case high noise completely leads to null scores across all 
metrics. 
Figure 9. Missed Detection Rate and False Alarm Rate Results for EO dataset (without IoU 
threshold). 
4.1.3.4 
Validation of framework and understanding follow-ups for defense and security users 
We see from the above analysis that significant performance differences can exist, and be discovered, within 
different segments of the data for an open-source, general foundation model. It is important to note that a CV 
system developer is likely to further fine-tune such foundation models with domain-specific datasets to 
overcome performance issues on each of these various edge cases. However, such fine-tuning efforts come at 
a cost and are likely to lead to trade-offs in other segments of performance, for which visibility is important 
for defense and security teams evaluating their performance, and determining if these trade-offs would be 
acceptable given certain mission parameters and requirements. In the case of the drastic performance gap in 
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
STO-MP-IST-210
1A.03 - 29

[Page 30 / 34 | chars: 4630]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

the model’s performance on IR data, further engineering efforts might be needed to optimize a different set 
of model architectures for IR data within the CV system, with perhaps a switching function to ensure that the 
appropriate model is used on the various data streams (for instance, for sensors with both thermal and 
electro-optical imaging modes). Further live testing before full procurement or deployment in the case of 
internally-developed models, scoped to certain areas of results requiring higher confidence not available in 
these tests, may also be required. Having gone through the rigor of the above methodology, evaluators will 
be able to focus live testing scenarios on the specific areas of concern, for instance focusing on replicating 
scenarios of multiple small drones ‘swarming’ at dusk and testing the limits of the CV system to a greater 
extent. 
Even after a vendor is awarded the contract and its systems subsequently deployed with attendant re-tuning 
or improvements, this information would be useful for operators to understand the operational limitations of 
their chosen solution, and if necessary, re-design operational or system processes to account for them. For 
example, while the initial formulation of these system operational requirements could have been based on the 
initial aim of replacing human sensor operators, enhanced human operator oversight could be re-introduced 
for certain known envelopes of underperformance such as dawn/dusk hours or cloudy days, whereby the 
sensor system itself could alert the operator of such conditions by detecting and reporting on ambient light 
conditions.  
4.2 
Supporting Information-sharing Across Partner Organizations 
We developed this framework and its enabling technical toolkits and simulation platform, with the intent to 
enable better collaboration between trusted partner organizations, many of which may be exploring or 
evaluating similar vendor systems for similar use cases. There are current frictions in how such technical 
evaluations are currently shared. Some of the largest issues arising from the inability to share classified 
datasets from operational sensors and lacking sufficient granularity to discuss the composition of such 
datasets which vary greatly in their imaging modalities, terrain and environments deployed, and targets of 
interest. Moreover, it is not always feasible to share large imagery datasets or spend additional effort 
tailoring documentation of detailed test methodology for understanding by another partner operating in a 
different language, cultural and organizational context.  
The framework we propose in this paper attempts to mitigate these frictions while preserving the 
confidentiality of sensitive operational sensor datasets. While the principles of the framework’s construction 
itself is intended to be at PUBLIC RELEASE, further customization along more bespoke use cases may be 
required amongst partner militaries which can lead to the resulting ASQI, metrics and results being adapted 
to NATO RESTRICTED to facilitate information-sharing, even while the sensors themselves could be at 
NATO CONFIDENTIAL level or above. The ability to break down test methodology for any such use case 
into defined parameters of quality, mapped to technical testing and metrics, will allow partner organizations 
to communicate their findings at a high-level while sharing a common aligned understanding of the rigor and 
nuance of the evaluation methodology of each. 
4.3 
Future Work 
Given the significant time constraints in writing this paper, we selected a subset of data to work with under a 
hypothetical scenario; further parallel use cases such as testing drone tracking and perception systems on 
flying counter-drone platforms – which would require datasets taking into consideration those view angles to 
capture sufficient representation of different hostile drone aspects (i.e. with fields of view relating to ‘look-
ahead’ and ‘look-down’). We also had to use an open-source, non-fine-tuned zero-shot model (YOLOE) to 
validate how our framework would generate insights for defense and security users, as we had reached out to 
several CV system developers from both industry and academia but were unable to receive a favorable reply 
to evaluate their models. This meant that when the performance of the model on an IR dataset turned out to 
be so poor that further analyses would have been insignificant, we were unable to demonstrate the power of 
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision 
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment
1A.03 - 30
STO-MP-IST-210

[Page 31 / 34 | chars: 1723]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

the framework in finding and identifying fine-grained CV system underperformance. Future projects could 
focus on discovering and analyzing the potential underperformance of CV systems optimized for IR 
imagery, to explore the potentially interesting idiosyncrasies of processing infra-red imagery especially 
within military contexts, such as performance under cases of thermal shadow or thermal crossover. 
Furthermore, the above ASQI and test metric mapping, alongside the simulation platforms, are extensible to 
other multi-modal solutions beyond visual and IR datasets in CV systems. Potential areas of further 
extension with such a framework include extending it to thermal and radar systems (outside of where this 
framework is already potentially applicable on processed and generated images) evaluating audio AI-enabled 
sensor systems, or evaluating unmanned ground vehicle localization and mapping capabilities, as well as the 
development of a NATO-wide benchmark for certain common use cases (e.g. performance of CV systems 
classifying known adversary inventory). 
In future work, we invite those who would seek to investigate the deeper workings of their CV systems 
based on the described use cases, and others, to contact us and attempt our methods on their models, and 
further validate and develop how our framework would be useful for their needs. Beyond drone detection 
and tracking, we look forward to deepening our partnerships with the broader NATO community of like-
minded partners to discover more use cases, and contribute to the defense of our shared values and interests. 
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
STO-MP-IST-210
1A.03 - 31

[Page 32 / 34 | chars: 2884]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Works Cited 
[1]
Bundeswehr. “New Counter-Drone System for Camp Protection Fielded Successfully.”
Www.bundeswehr.de, 15 Aug. 2022, www.bundeswehr.de/en/organization/equipment/news/new-counter-
drone-system-for-camp-protection-5483530. Accessed 10 July 2025.
[2]
Burton, Simon, and Herd, Benjamin. “Addressing Uncertainty in the Safety Assurance of
Machine-Learning.” 
Frontiers 
in 
Computer 
Science, 
vol. 
5, 
6 
Apr. 
2023,
https://doi.org/10.3389/fcomp.2023.1132580. Accessed 20 July 2025.
[3]
CEN. Unmanned Aircraft Systems - Counter UAS - Testing Methodology. Oct. 2024.
[4]
DNV. “Assurance of AI-Enabled Systems: Trustworthy AI Recommended Practices | DNV-
RP-0671.” DNV,2025, www.dnv.com/digital-trust/recommended-practices/assurance-of-ai-enabled-
systems-dnv-rp-0671/. Accessed 18 Aug. 2025.
[5]
Dong, Yifei, et al. “Securing the Skies: A Comprehensive Survey on Anti-UAV Methods,
Benchmarking, and Future Directions.” ArXiv.org, 17 Apr. 2025, arxiv.org/abs/2504.11967. Accessed 18
July 2025.
[6]
Jian, Zhao, et al. “1st Anti-UAV Challenge.” Anti-UAV, 1BC, anti-uav.github.io/. Accessed 20
June 2025.
[7]
Jiang, Nan, et al. “Anti-UAV: A Large Multi-Modal Benchmark for UAV Tracking.” ArXiv.org,
Cornell University, 2021, arxiv.org/abs/2101.08466. Accessed 29 July 2025.
[8]
Knight, Frank. Risk, Uncertainty and Profit. Vol. 31, Wilmington, Vernon Press, 1921,
fraser.stlouisfed.org/files/docs/publications/books/risk/riskuncertaintyprofit.pdf. Accessed 22 July 2025.
[9]
Koksal, Aybora, et al. “Effect of Annotation Errors on Drone Detection with YOLOv3.” 2022
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops (CVPRW), 1 Dec. 2021,
arxiv.org/abs/2004.01059, https://doi.org/10.1109/cvprw50498.2020.00523. Accessed 28 July 2025.
[10]
Luiten, Jonathon, et al. “HOTA: A Higher Order Metric for Evaluating Multi-Object Tracking.”
International Journal of Computer Vision, vol. 129, no. 2, 8 Oct. 2020, pp. 548–578,
arxiv.org/pdf/2009.07736, https://doi.org/10.1007/s11263-020-01375-2. Accessed 29 July 2025.
[11]
Luiten, Jonathan. “How to Evaluate Tracking with the HOTA Metrics.” Autonomous Vision Blog,
2 Mar. 2021, autonomousvision.github.io/hota-metrics/. Accessed 29 July 2025.
[12]
Sabuncu, Mert R. “Intelligence Plays Dice: Stochasticity Is Essential for Machine Learning.”
ArXiv (Cornell University), 1 Jan. 2020, https://doi.org/10.48550/arxiv.2008.07496. Accessed 1 Aug.
2025.
[13]
Singh, Shivalika, et al. “The Leaderboard Illusion.” ArXiv.org, Cornell University, 12 May 2025,
arxiv.org/abs/2504.20879. Accessed 14 July 2025.
[14]
Smith, Ralph C. Uncertainty Quantification. Society for Industrial and Applied Mathematics
(SIAM), 2024.
[15]
Sullivan, T.J. Introduction to Uncertainty Quantification. Springer, 14 Dec. 2015.
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision 
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment
1A.03 - 32
STO-MP-IST-210

[Page 33 / 34 | chars: 1246]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

[16]
Svanström, Fredrik, et al. “A Dataset for Multi-Sensor Drone Detection.” Data in Brief, vol. 39,
Dec. 2021, p. 107521, arxiv.org/pdf/2111.01888, https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dib.2021.107521. Accessed 1
Aug. 2025.
[17]
Virtanen, Pauli, et al. “SciPy 1.0: Fundamental Algorithms for Scientific Computing in Python.”
Nature Methods, vol. 17, no. 3, 3 Feb. 2020, pp. 261–272, www.nature.com/articles/s41592-019-0686-2.
[18]
Wang, 
Ao, 
et 
al. 
“YOLOE:
Real-Time 
Seeing 
Anything.” 
Arxiv.org, 
2020,
arxiv.org/html/2503.07465v1. Accessed 18 Aug. 2025.
[19]
Waterman, Shaun. “Military AI Will Mean Overhauling Test: DOD’s First AI Chief.” Air &
Space Forces Magazine, 10 Apr. 2025, www.airandspaceforces.com/military-ai-overhauling-test/. 
Accessed 15 July 2025. 
[20]
Wilson, Edwin Bidwell. Probable Inference, the Law of Succession, and Statistical Inference. J.
Amer. Stat. Assoc., 1927, pp. 209–212.
[21]
Zhu, Xue-Feng, et al. “Evidential Detection and Tracking Collaboration: New Problem,
Benchmark 
and 
Algorithm 
for 
Robust 
Anti-UAV 
System.” 
ArXiv.org, 
4 
July 
2023,
arxiv.org/abs/2306.15767. Accessed 29 July 2025.
Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment 
STO-MP-IST-210
1A.03 - 33

[Page 34 / 34 | chars: 117]
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision 
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment
1A.03 - 34
STO-MP-IST-210

