Chen et al.: Metallogenic setting and material source of Caihong copper-lead-zinc polymetallic deposit
- 670 -
derived from magmatic sulfur. The source region that can supply the ore-forming
materials shall be later than plate subduction and the deformation and metamorphism,
and shall have proper distance and magmatic hydrothermal migration pathway. The
regional stress shall take the tension stress as primary. Evidences suggest that Zhongbao
granite body is formed in the collision-extension transformation stage of the plates in
the Early Permian (Chen et al., 2013), which is later than the time of regional
metamorphism and deformation (Wu et al., 1992). Moreover, Caihong ore district has
obviously W geochemical anomaly, and has obviously north-east trending distribution
with Cu, Pb, Zn elements (Xue et al., 2012), indicating that north-east trending fault in
ore district could be the migration pathway of magmatic hydrothermal. In addition, the
content characteristic of REE in veined ore sulfide is obviously similar with Zhongbao
granite body. According to the above evidences, it can be concluded that the intrusion of
Zhongbao granite body and subsequent hydrothermal activity in Early Permian is the
main cause of forming late veined ore body, which provide the source of ore-forming
sulfur and main fluid. The hydrothermal solution migrates along the late NE trending
extension fault and activates ore-forming elements in host rock, forming the veined Cu,
Pb, Zn ore body in fault development part. As the main structure activities in this stage
region has been finished, the late veined ore body has been kept better and no
deformation and metamorphism.
Conclusions
The following conclusions are obtained through above discussion:
1. The genetic type of Caihong Cu, Pb, Zn polymetallic deposit is volcanic
exhalation sedimentary- magmatic hydrothermal superimposed type.
2. The first metallogenic stage is formed in the oceanic crust subduction island-arc
rift setting in the Middle-Late Silurian. Metallogenic sulfur is derived from the mixing
of continental marginal arc volcanic magmatic sulfur and sulfur reduced by seawater
sulfate in the same period, and ore-forming fluid is derived from the mixing of
submarine hydrothermal solution and volcanic magmatic water.
3. The second metallogenic stage is formed by the invasion of Zhongbao granitic
body and late magmatic hydrothermal action in the collision-extension transformation
stage of the plates in Early Permian. Metallogenic sulfur is derived from magmatic
sulfur of Zhongbao granite, and ore-forming fluid is derived from the mixing of deep
magmatic water and atmospheric precipitation. The genetic type of this stage is the
hydrothermal filling metasomatic type after magma stage.
Acknowledgements. This study was financially supported by the project of Metallogical condition
research and ore prospecting target area evalution of copper-gold-iron metallogenic belt in Kuruktag
(2011BAB06B04) .We appreciate the engineers of Caihong deposite for their help and fruitful discussion
during our field investigations.
REFERENCES
[1] An, W., Cao, Z.M., Zheng, J.B., Liu, J., and Chen, M. (2003): The development of study
on ancient and modern volcanogenic massive sulfide deposite. –Advance in Earth
Science 18: 773-782. (in Chinese with English abstract)
[2] Barriga, F.J., and Kerrich, R. (1984): Extreme 18O-enriched volcanics and 18O-evolved
APPLIED ECOLOGY AND ENVIRONMENTAL RESEARCH 15(3): 651-674.
http://www.aloki.hu ● ISSN 1589 1623 (Print) ● ISSN 1785 0037 (Online)
DOI: http://dx.doi.org/10.15666/aeer/1503_651674
 2017, ALÖKI Kft., Budapest, Hungary