This article has been accepted for publication in IEEE Access. This is the author's version which has not been fully edited and
content may change prior to final publication. Citation information: DOI 10.1109/ACCESS.2024.3390035
M.Leeetal.:IntelligentMilitaryDrone:ACaseStudyofaReconnaissanceDrone
6) Theissueliesinpart6,wheretheconfidenceindetect- is covered. While it might look like an easy problem
ingincompletelyobscuredtanksbytreesorstructures to solve with basic rules from a human perspective,
islow.Forthosemakingthefinaldecisionsonattacks, for a drone, the situation is much more complex and
this level of uncertainty in detection isn’t practical. not as easy to handle. This is exactly the point where
Thus, it is essential to focus on improving detection advanced technology is needed to realize the concept
accuracytooffermoretrustworthyinformationforsuch ofintelligence.
critical judgments. One possible approach to address Therefore, this paper proposes using reinforcement
this issue is improving the detection neural network learningtosolvetheissueofsecuringalineofsighton
[44].However,relyingentirelyontheobjectdetection incompletely concealed objects and increasing object
modelisproblematic.Thisisbecauseobjectdetection confidence levels. For this, we utilize images where
modelsexhibitvaryingconfidencelevelsbasedonthe objects have been detected along with various vec-
angleoftheobjecttheyaretryingtodetect[45].More- tor observations to autonomously control the drone’s
over,forobjectsthatarepartlyobscured,thedifference movement and the camera angle. In the next chapter,
inconfidencelevelsdependingontheangleislikelyto we delve deeper into the fundamental concepts of re-
beevengreater.Figure6showstheresultsofexamining inforcement learning, conduct experiments, and then
theconfidencelevelsforpartiallyobscuredtanksusing discusstheresults.
an object detection algorithm in the Unity simulator.
In this case, the images are from a drone’s perspec- C. REINFORCEMENTLEARNING
tive,lookingdownwardsfromdirectlyabovethetrees. Inreinforcementlearning,anagentintheenvironment,which
Here, the tanks are identified by the object detection isthespacewheretheagentislocated,selectsactionsbased
algorithminapurplecolor.Theconfidencelevelsvary onthecurrentsituationinformation,knownasthestate.The
significantlybasedonthetank’sangleandthedegreeof environment then changes in response to these actions, and
obscuration,withthetankintheleftpictureevenfailing theagentreceivesrewardsasaresult.Thegoalofreinforce-
tobedetected. ment learning is to maximize the cumulative rewards [46].
Inthisstudy,theenvironmentispartiallyobservablefromthe
agent’sperspective.Whenthedronescoutsforenemiesinthe
Unitysimulatorspace,itdoesn’tinitiallyknowthelocationof
theenemies.Itobservesonlypartoftheenvironmentusingits
camera,nothavingcompleteinformationabouttheenemies
fromthestart.Thisisdifferentfromfullyobservablegames
like chess or Go, where the positions and movements of all
piecesareknown.Inpartiallyobservablesituations,theterm
FIGURE6. ConfidencelevelforanincompletelyoccludedtankinUnity
simulator. ‘observation’isusedinsteadof‘state’todescribethecurrent
situation information. The following sections introduce the
Thisimpliesthatrelyingsolelyonthedetectionneural components of reinforcement learning and the algorithms
networkisnotthebeststrategy.Therefore,movingthe used.
droneandadjustingtheangleofthecameraattachedto
ittosecurealineofsightontheobjectcanbeanother 1) Environment
way to enhance the confidence level. However, could In this research, the reinforcement learning aims to achieve
suchmovementsbeaddressedwithasortofrule-based advanced intelligent behaviors in scenarios occurring after
approach? Considering the constraints of maintaining relatively basic tasks like waypoint reconnaissance and en-
a certain altitude and the drone’s requirement to look emy tracking. Therefore, the reinforcement learning envi-
downwards from the air, resolving this issue with a ronment concentrates on the drone’s autonomous actions to
rule-basedapproachisnotasstraightforwardasitmay enhancethedetectionconfidencelevelaftertrackingatank,
seem. Let’s think of a situation where, if something especially when the confidence level is low. As depicted in
like a tree is hiding a tank, the drone has a rule to fly Figure 7, at the start of learning, the drone is positioned
away from that tree and turn its camera to look at the above a partially obscured tank. The drone receives visual
tank. For this strategy to work effectively, it’s crucial inputthrougharedcameralocatedonitsunderside,whichis
torecognizethekindsofobjectsthatcouldconcealthe essentialforthedetectionprocess.Thisredboxrepresentsthe
tankandfigureoutwhichportionofthetankishidden. drone’s"eye."Thegreycameraandthelargegreysquareare
However, training the system to segment and identify usedtoobservethedrone’sbehaviorforverificationpurposes
everypotentialconcealingobject,suchasvarioustrees andarenotdirectlyinvolvedinthelearningprocess.
andstructures,posesasignificantchallenge,especially To prevent the model from overfitting to a specific envi-
withlimitedcomputationalresources.Additionally,the ronmentduringtraining,domainrandomizationisemployed
task of detecting a tank that is partly masked is com- in each episode. This process involves randomly varying
plex, as it requires pinpointing which part of the tank elementswithinthesimulationenvironment,whichhelpsthe
6 VOLUME11,2023
This work is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution-NonCommercial-NoDerivatives 4.0 License. For more information, see https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/