4
STEP 2: Plug in the AC Power cord to an approved 120V-AC extension cord. The LED will
start Blinking Slow GREEN during pre-charge, and then switch to either RED/GREEN
alternating (recovery mode), Fast GREEN during fast charge, or Slow GREEN during trickle
charge and maintenance. When the battery is fully charged and maintenance complete, the
LED will stop blinking and go OFF.
Charge Time: Expected charge times are 0% - 80% fast charge (fast blink) completed in 1 ½
hours. Slow charge (Slow blink) can take 1 ½ hours longer, 80% - 100%. Battery maintenance
can take a long time, depending upon if cell balancing needs to occur. The fan will continue to
slow blink during this process, but if it has been plugged in for 3 hours, it is fully charged. Leave
the fan plugged in as often as possible to take advantage of the automated cell maintenance.
Unplugging it at any point to use it will not damage the fan or battery.
BATTERY MAINTENANCE
The following are good maintenance practice:
• The battery has an integrated charging system. The integrated charging system will fully
manage the battery when the fan is plugged in and the power switch is off.
• To charge your fan, simply plug it in and turn the power switch counterclockwise to the
off position. The power switch must be in the off position for charging to take place.
• Quick Charge – A quick charge will charge your battery to about 80% of full capacity. A
fully discharged battery takes approximately 90 minutes to Quick Charge.
• Trickle (Slow) Charge –Trickle charge takes place from 80% to 100% capacity, and
takes approximately 90 minutes. Best practice is to complete a full charge during
maintenance.
• Battery Maintenance – Once the charging process is complete, the battery management
system will perform maintenance on the battery if the fan remains plugged in. This
includes balancing all cells for optimized performance.
• Charge Battery after each and every use even for a short period. The early recharging
and constant charging does not damage the LiFePO4 battery as they do not develop
memory.
• Always keep the battery in charged condition through constant charging or regular
maintenance. This will ensure the readiness operation of the fan and the full capacity of
each operation. If possible, leave fan plugged into shore-lined truck.
The battery maintenance process once charging is complete may take several hours, depending
on the condition and characteristic of each individual battery cell. It can also restart during
extended periods of nonuse. The LED does not have to be OFF before using the fully charged
battery.
BH-20 Operations Manual v2.4