2
WARNING
The following information is important to the proper and safe use of your BlowHard BH20 Positive
Pressure Ventilation (PPV) Fan. Be sure to READ and UNDERSTAND completely the Operating
Manual BEFORE operating the fan. FAILURE TO FOLLOW THESE INSTRUCTIONS COULD
CAUSE PROPERTY DAMAGE or PERSONAL INJURY.
SAFETY INSTRUCTIONS
It is the responsibility of the user to provide proper PPV/PPA Training and provide adequate
Personal Protective Equipment (PPE) i.e. gloves and eye protection for handling this and other
electrical equipment.
This electrical equipment utilizes 110/220V-AC which can cause serious electrical shock if not
properly operated or maintained.
Use Rated and Approved Outdoor Electrical Extension Cord only with this equipment. Do not
submerge this equipment under water. Avoid getting electrical connection wet. Do not come in
contact with wet electrical connections without proper personal protective equipment.
The operating fan is a high speed rotating mechanical device that can cause serious injury if body
parts come into contact with rotating surfaces or material thrown into moving parts. Although
safety grills are installed, they do not block all objects from coming in contact with the rotating
surfaces. Do not push body parts or foreign objects through the grill slots. Do not allow any
object, material, or fluid into the intake or outlet of the fan, or to come into contact with the fan
blade.
Pinch Hazards. The fan is made to fold in and out for storage and operation. Care must be taken
when setting up the equipment for operation, and for storing the unit. Pinch points are at the
hinged sections of the fan. Do not put body parts in the space between opposing parts that are
coming together upon closure or opening of the fan.
Toe Hazards. This equipment may be stowed in elevated compartments and shelves. Safety
handles and shoulder strap are provided for lifting and transporting the equipment. Appropriate
footwear and gloves should be worn when handling equipment.
Please observe the above warnings which are symbolized and displayed on the yellow Warning
Label on the fan enclosure. Practice Common Sense.
BH-20 Operations Manual v2.4