22 LajosBrons Vol.28
Table 2 amodal/modaland impersonal/personalmemory
amodal pseudo-modal modal
impersonal (a) (b) (c)
personal (d) (e) (f)
man life, while categorization by infants starts within a few months after birth10.
Hence, the processes of category formation and (much later) of associating words
with things in the earliest stages of language learning are probably largely uncon-
scious (and automatic—we are “born to categorize”, as Quinn’s (2011) overview of
categorization by infants and children is appropriately titled).
Moreover, if aphantasic toddlers learn language by means of something like un-
conscious modal memory, then adult aphantasics might also have unconscious modal
memory,whichwouldexplaintheself-reportedoccurrenceofimageryinthedreamsof
many aphantasics11, for example, but which would also raise further questions. Con-
sidering that unconscious modal memory appears not to be automatically and con-
sistently activated when an aphantasic remembers something (Palombo et al. 2015;
Keogh & Pearson 2018), What activates unconscious modal memory in aphantasics
and what cognitive role(s) does it play?12
5
Ifaphantasicslackmodalmemorybuthavepersonalmemoryandaffectivemem-
ory(theothertwoaspectsofepisodicmemorydistinguished above), thenthesethree
are not just different aspects of the same kind of memory, but are two or three in-
dependent dimensions or kinds of memory instead. The three distinctions on the
amodal/modal dimension combined with the personal/impersonal memory contrast
results—at least hypothetically—in six different kinds of memory, as shown in Ta-
ble 2.
In addition to the SDAM and aphantasia-related evidence, which supports the
column distinctions, there is other evidence for some of the row distinctions in this
table. Louis Renoult and colleagues (2012) argue for something they call “personal
semantics”, which is “highly personal (like episodic memory), yet, at the same time,
devoid of any subjective sense of recollection” (550). Personal semantics lacks the
modality of episodic memory—it is personal and amodal, and therefore, cell (d)
and/or (e) in the table. While Renoult et al. points at the difference between im-
10 On categorization by infants and young children, see Quinn (2011). On the develop-
ment of consciousnessin children, see Zelazo, Gao, & Todd (2007).
11 As well as other kinds of involuntary imagery. See section 2.
12 Answeringthisquestionisobviouslyoutsidethescopeofthispaper,butitshouldbe
added to the other open questions mentioned in section 2.
—22—