Aphantasia,SDAM,andEpisodicMemory 25
vantages. Firstly, there is probably a limit to how much information can be concep-
tualized (or “semanticized”, or “amodalized”) and stored in amodal form. Secondly,
thisprocessmightnotbeentirelyautomatic, andthus, ifthesubjectdoesn’tremem-
bertoremember(i.e. store)something,itwon’tberemembered(i.e. retrieved). And
thirdly, amodal memory might degrade faster and differently than modal memory.
In any case, pseudo-modal memory is probably a poor substitute for modal memory
in many circumstances, which explains the memory deficiencies of aphantasics and
people with SDAM.
6
Tulving’s list of diagnostic features was not intended as a conjunctive definition,
but if it is interpreted as such, then episodic memory is the kind of memory that has
all of those features. In other words, episodic memory is (i) in table 3. Similarly,
semantic memory is the kind of memory that has all of the features in the semantic
memory column of table 1 (or in Tulving’s table on which table 1 is based) and lacks
all of the features of episodic memory: cell (a) in table 3. The semantic/episodic dis-
tinction, then, isthe(a)/(i)contrast, whichraisesthequestionwhatkindofmemory
all the other variants in table 3 are. In practice, however, episodic memory often
appears to be operationalized disjunctively—that is, memory that is modal or per-
sonal or affective tends to be treated as episodic memory. In laboratory research, for
example,episodicmemoryissometimesoperationalizedasmemoryofpictures,which
just requires (c) (or (b), perhaps) in table 3. In such a disjunctive understanding,
everything except (a) would be episodic memory.
Perhaps, such apparent disjunctive understandings of episodic memory are the
consequence of an implicit assumption that of the nine varieties of memory in table
3, only (a) and (i) exist. Under that assumption, which has been shown to be false
above,theconjunctiveanddisjunctiveunderstandingsofepisodicmemorynecessarily
coincide—thenallandonlymodalmemoryisepisodicmemory,andtherefore,picture
memory is episodic memory.
A similar assumption seems to play a key role in many—perhaps, even all—
explanations of the evolutionary advantage of episodic memory. (See Michaelian
2016foracriticalreview.) Thatis, thesupposedevolutionaryadvantagesofepisodic
memoryandtherelatedabilityofmentaltimetravelintothefutureareneveradvan-
tagesofjust (i)butequallyofoneormoreothervariantsintable3. Forexample,for
theabilitiestoavoidpastmistakesand/ortoplanandprepareforanuncertainfuture
(d) or (e) are sufficient, although lacking the affective dimension the subject may be
disinterested in avoiding mistakes or in planning for the future. In any case, modal
imagination—which is a supposed core aspect of episodic memory—is not necessary
(but this is also evident from the fact that aphantasics are just as (in-) capable of
—25—