12 LajosBrons Vol.28
different ways. Most obviously, the term “reduced” immediately raises the question:
Reduced to what extent (or by how much)? Furthermore, the phrase “reduced or
absent” also suggests continuity between weak (or “low”) imagers and non-imagers
and it is presently unknown whether there is such a continuity. Although it is intu-
itivelyplausiblethatabsenceofimageryisthelowextremeonascalerangingfromno
imagery to extremely vivid imagery (as reported by hyperphantasics), it might turn
out to be the case that non-imagers are not just very weak imagers but that there is
a qualitative difference between having (very) weak imagery abilities and having no
such abilities whatsoever.
Secondly, voluntaryimagerycontrastswithinvoluntary imagery, whichcomesin
two very different kinds: involuntary flashes of imagery during wakefulness, and im-
ageryindreams. Giventheroleofimageryinautobiographicmemory(e.g. Greenberg
&Knowlton2014),onewouldexpectsignificantdifferencesinmemorybetweensome-
one who experiences no involuntary imagery at all or only in dreams, and someone
whoexperiencesflashesofimageryrelatedtopreviousexperiencesduringwakefulness.
(The occurrenceofimageryindreams alsoraisesthe question whether, when, andto
what extent other kinds of sub- and/or unconscious imagery occurs in aphantasics.
See also sections 4 and 6.)
Thirdly, as mentioned above, only about half of the respondents in the initial
study reported lacking imagery in all sense modalities. This, of course, raises the
question: How many and which kinds of imagery must be affected for the “aphan-
tasia” label to apply? What complicates this is the number of different kinds of
imagery, opacity in introspection, and the possibility of overlap. A list of kinds of
imagery does not coincide with a list of sense modalities. There is no single faculty
of visual imagery, for example. Instead, there are (at least) two distinct kinds of
visual imagery—object imagery and spatial imagery—and these two play different
roles (Kosslyn 1994). And some kinds of imagery—such as motor imagery—do not
seemtobeassociatedwithparticularsensemodalitiesatall. (Theotherwayaround,
while there is a sense of balance, I doubt there is imagery of balance.) It may be the
case that in imagining shapes, a lack of object imagery can be compensated (at least
partially)withspatialimageryand/ormotorimagery. Iftherearesuchcompensation
effectsandother interactions andoverlapsbetweendifferentkinds ofimagery, it may
be hard to keep them apart in introspection, but also in psychological tests (if those
are insufficiently carefully designed). Furthermore, some kinds of imagery (such as
spatial and motor imagery) may present themselves in a form that is less likely to be
recognized as imagery, which further diminishes the reliability of introspection.
These considerations suggest that the least ambiguous variety of aphantasia is
a condition of completely lacking voluntary imagery of any kind and lacking invol-
untary (flashes of) imagery during wakefulness. Nicholas Watkins (2018) calls this
“total aphantasia”. However, the above considerations also suggest that introspec-
—12—