Aphantasia,SDAM,andEpisodicMemory 13
tion is probably not a reliable method to distinguishing such total aphantasia—if it
exists—from near-total aphantasia, and perhaps even from variants of far-from-total
aphantasia. Itmayturnouttobethecasethatself-reportedtotalaphantasiaisnever
really “total”.
Aroundthetimeofthe(2015)paperbyZemanandcolleagues,twootherrelated
papers werepublished. Daniel Greenbergand Barbara Knowlton (2014) investigated
theroleofvisualimageryinautobiographical memory,andoneoftheexperimentsin
thatstudyinvolvedtwonon-imagers(oraphantasics). Bothparticipantshad“highly
abnormal ratings for reliving”, which according to the authors confirms “previous
work showing that mental imagery is necessary (though not sufficient) for a strong
senseofreliving”(931),andwhichexplainstheaforementionedself-reportedmemory
deficiencies of aphantasics.
Daniela Palombo and colleagues (2015) also reported on a study about “re-
living” or “the subjective sense of re-experiencing” in episodic memory, and coined
theterm“severelydeficientautobiographicmemory”(SDAM)todescribethreecases
ofhealthyadultsreportingnotto“re-live”or“subjectivelyre-experience”previously
experienced events. All three cases scored normal on most standard neuropsycholog-
icaltestsexcept forcomplexfigurerecall: theirtestscoreswere“notableforimpaired
recovery of visual information” (111). fMRI showed reduced activation of brain re-
gions involved in autobiographic memory, and structural neuroimaging revealed a
slight reduction in the volume of the right hippocampus, which is associated among
others with the recollection of non-verbal/visual information. (On the role of the
hippocampus, see section 6.)
SDAM is defined as “a mnemonic syndrome that is confined to an inability
to mentally travel backwards in time in the absence of detectable neuropathology
or significant daily handicap” (Palombo et al. 2015: 111), or more informally as
“the inability to re-experience personal events” (106). All three documented cases of
SDAM are also aphantasics, and it seems plausible that their aphantasia is the cause
of their SDAM. If re-living experiences requires imagery, then a total aphantasic is
incapable of re-experiencing mental events, and then all cases of total aphantasia
would be cases of SDAM. However, someone with involuntary imagery, imagery in
at least some relevant modalities, or very weak imagery would not necessarily have
SDAM. The other way around, it is conceivable that someone has functioning im-
agery abilities, but cannot use that ability to re-live her own past. This would be a
(hypothetical?) case of SDAM without aphantasia.
Although there is now a growing body of evidence for the phenomena of aphan-
tasia and SDAM3, much about the two conditions and their relation remains unclear
3 Inadditionto papersmentionedabove,Jacobs,Schwartzkopf,& Silvanto(2018)and
Fuentemilla, Palombo, & Levine (2018) present further evidence on aphantasia and
—13—