Aphantasia,SDAM,andEpisodicMemory 17
high-imagers.
For example, one of the most common kinds of tests that are supposed to in-
volve imagery are mental rotation tests. Subjects get to see one figure and have to
compare that figure to one or more other figures to judge whether one or more of
those other figures are rotated versions of the original figure. However, if the first
figure and test figures are shown simultaneously, the subject can just glance back
and forth between pictures to compare details of the figures without ever forming a
mental image, and even if the first figure must be remembered to do the test, the
subject can remember a verbal description of the figure—provided that the figure is
simple enough, which usually is the case—and then compare the test figure(s) with
that description8. These suggestions do, of course, imply that non- or low-imagers
and high-imagers use different brain regions in mental rotation tasks, and there is
evidence for such a difference indeed (Logie et al. 2011).
If some people lack a certain mental ability, and there are ways of compensating
that deficiency in many (perhaps even most) circumstances, then one would expect
that deficiency only to have rather subtle effects. Considering that a lack of (specific
kinds of) imagery can probably be compensated in various ways in many circum-
stances, if there are significant differences in imagery abilities across individuals, one
would expect there to be subtle—but not vast— corresponding differences on cogni-
tive tasks involving imagery, and some of those differences might only show up on an
fMRI scan or by means of another imaging technique.
(ad3)—Asmentionedtwoparagraphsback,Logieetal. (2011)foundthatlow-
and high-imagers show different brain activation patterns in mental rotation tasks.
The study that defined SDAM by Palombo et al. (2015) found that their aphantasic
cases were in the severely impaired range for complex figure recall. Zeman (2017)
foundalinkbetweenaphantasiaandprosopagnosia(reducedfacialrecognition). And
directlycontradictingSchwitzgebel’sclaims,RebeccaKeoghandJoelPearson(2018)
foundthat“congenitalaphantasiaischaracterisedbyalackoflow-levelsensoryvisual
imagery, and is not due to a lack of metacognition or an inability to introspect”.
Thereisn’t much evidencefor(the effectsof)aphantasia yet, but Schwitzgebel’s
claim that there is no evidence is false. (But it must be noted that all of this evi-
dence was published after Schwitzgebel published his main papers on introspection.)
It is true, however, that most earlier studies donot revealany substantial differences
between low- and high-imagers on cognitive tasks involving imagery. This apparent
negative evidence may be due to three methodological flaws, the first two of which
8 Consideringthatsuchnon-imaginisticcomparisonproceduresmightbemorereliable
than the use of imagery, it may even be the case that an aphantasic who is used to
relying thereon scores higher on a simple mental rotation task than someone who is
used to relying on imagery.
—17—