AnnalsoftheJapanAssociationforPhilosophyofScience Vol.28(2019) 9〜32 9
Aphantasia, SDAM, and Episodic Memory
Lajos Brons∗
Abstract
Episodicmemory(EM)involvesre-experiencingpastexperiencesbymeansof
mentalimagery. Aphantasics(wholackmentalimagery)andpeoplewithseverely
deficientautobiographicalmemory(SDAM)lacktheabilitytore-experience,which
would imply that they don’t have EM. However, aphantasics and people with
SDAM have personal and affective memories, which are other defining aspects of
EM (in addition to re-experiencing). This suggests that these supposed aspects
of EM really are independent faculties or modules of memory, and that EM is
a composite faculty rather than a natural kind. Apparent varieties of (normal
and“defective”)EM (aswell assome closely related kinds of memory)are differ-
ent combinations of these modules, and the EM construct itself adds little if any
explanatory value to these modules.
Key words: episodic memory, imagery, aphantasia, SDAM, mental kinds
1
Most of the research on episodic memory of the last half century assumes (im-
plicitly or explicitly) that episodic memory is a natural kind. Recently, Sen Cheng
and Markus Werning (2016) made this claim explicitly. According to the “homeo-
static cluster view” they adopt something is a natural kind if the entities belonging
to that kind share a large set of inductively and explanatorily relevant properties
and that kind is the largest class whose members share those properties due to some
underlying causal mechanism1. Episodic memory satisfies these criteria they claim,
∗ Nihon University & Lakeland University
E-mail: mail@lajosbrons.net
I’d like to thank Daniel Greenberg, Kourken Michaelian, Nicholas Watkins, Adam
Zeman,andtwo anonymousrefereesfortheirhelpfulcommentsonearlierversionsof
this paper.
1 This “weak” notion of natural kinds contrasts with the older and much stronger, es-
sentialist view, and was developed mostly in response to criticism of that stronger
view. (See Dupr´e 1993 for a noteworthy example of such criticism.) One could, of
course,conceiveofanevenweakerviewbygivingup(orrelaxing)oneofthetwocri-
—9—