10 LajosBrons Vol.28
and therefore, is a natural kind.
Since Endel Tulving first distinguished episodic memory from semantic memory
in (1972), the concept of episodic memory has undergone a number of conceptual
changes resulting in a rather large set of loose definitions and operationalizations.
Essential in more recent understandings of the concept is what Tulving (1983) called
the “recollective experience” or what is now more commonly called “autonoetic con-
sciousness”. Tulving (1983) writes that “when a person remembers a past event, he
has a memory image of it and he is consciously aware of its being a mental replay
of what happened once before” (185), and that “ ‘memory image’ could serve as an
acceptablesynonym for ‘recollectiveexperience’”(186). Hence, episodic memoryin-
volves mental imagery. Furthermore, the notion of episodic memory as “replay” (or
re-experiencingorreliving)ofwhathappenedoncebeforeimpliesthatepisodicmem-
ory involves a subjective identification of the remembering subject with the subject
that experienced the original episode.
If episodic memory is a natural kind, then the involvement of mental imagery
and subjective identification and other explanatorily relevant properties of episodic
memoryshouldbepropertiesofthatkindandshouldhaveasharedunderlyingcausal
mechanism. Therearepeople, however,whoclaimnottoexperiencementalimagery.
If those “non-imagers” do have memories with many of the other relevant proper-
ties of episodic memory (such as the involvement of subjective identification), then
that would imply that non-imagers have severely deficient episodic memory or no
episodic memory at all, or alternatively, that episodic memory is not a natural kind
butacompositefaculty. Thelatterwouldbethecaseifepisodicmemoryconsistsofa
numberofmoreorlessindependentcomponentssuchthatthecomposite(i.e. episodic
memory) has no inductively and explanatory properties and/or no underlying causal
mechanism in addition to the properties of and causal mechanisms underlying its
components.
Recent research on aphantasia, lack of mental imagery (Zeman, Dewar, & Della
Sala 2015), and on severely deficient autobiographical memory (SDAM; Palombo et
al. 2015) suggests that the latter is the case indeed, or so I will argue in this pa-
per. PeoplewithaphantasiaorSDAMdonotreliveorre-experienceepisodes,butdo
have memories and lead otherwise normal lives, and that—in conjunction with other
empirical evidence—implies that episodic memory is a composite faculty.
The aim of this paper is to reassess the nature and status of episodic memory
in the light of what we currently know about SDAM and aphantasia (and related
matters). Towards that end, section 2 looks into the evidence for and nature of
SDAM and aphantasia, and section 3 discusses the main skeptical argument (that
teriaofthe“homeostaticclusterview”,butsuchanunderstandingof“naturalkinds”
would be so weak that it is rather doubtful whether it still would be appropriate to
speak of natural kinds at all.
—10—