24 LajosBrons Vol.28
no obvious reason why they would have to be, however.
According to Daniel Dennett (1992) and others, the self is a narrative construc-
tion. We are (more or less) the stories we tell about ourselves (to ourselves). (The
idea of the narrative self has been further developed in Narrative Identity Theory
within personality psychology.) In the reported cases of frontal leucotomy personal
stories lose their role in narrative self-construction (which is an ongoing activity)—
they become just stories without any special relevance or affect—and the subjects
lose their sense of self-continuity. Which is the cause and which is its effect isn’t
clearexactly(tomeatleast),buttherolethesestoriesplayexplains theiraffect,and
that explanation does not in any way depend on their form. That is, these stories—
the elements of our self-identity—can be modal (in the form of imagery-involving
recollections or re-imaginations), but they can also be amodal (i.e. more explicitly
story-like). In either case, they form who (we think) we are.
There is no reason, then, to assume that affective memory must be modal (i),
butthisshouldhavebeenobviousanyway: someonewithoutaffectivememorywould
be like a frontal leucotomy patient, and aphantasics and people with SDAM—who
lackmodalmemoryincluding(i)—mostcertainlyarenot. Consequently, aphantasics
(etc.) mustexperience(h). Thisdoesn’testablishtheexistenceof(g),however. Fora
possible example of (g), see Renoult and colleagues’ (2012) notion of “autobiograph-
ically significant concepts”, which they assume to be part of personal semantics.
Nevertheless, while the claim that aphantasics and people with SDAM lack per-
sonaloraffectivememorywouldbeimplausible,theydohaveautobiographicalmem-
ory deficiencies. Many aphantasics report having bad personal memories, and the
abbreviation“SDAM”standsfor“severelydeficientautobiographicalmemory”. How-
ever,thesedeficienciesare—mostlikely—notexplainedbydeficiencieswithregardto
personal or affective memory but by the lack of modal memory. If autobiographical
memory is roughly identical to personal memory and thus to (d) to (i) in table 3,
and aphantasics and people with SDAM lack (f) and (i), which are the two kinds of
modal personal memory, then they have deficient autobiographical memory indeed.
Anna Basso and colleagues (Basso, Bissiach, & Luzzatti 1980) report a case of
loss of imagery. The patient “said he knew his wife to be ‘small, grey haired, with
almond-shaped eyes’ but was unable to conjure up a picture of her in his mind”
(436). This and other aspects of the case report show that the patient—after losing
imagery—hadtoswitchfrominferringamodaldescriptions(or“semantic”knowledge)
frommodalmemory(i.e. imagery)todirectlyrecallingstoredamodaldescriptions—
that is, pseudo-modal memory—but lacking such stored amodal descriptions, he ex-
perienced severe memory deficiencies.
Presumably,aphantasicsandpeoplewithSDAMstoremuchmoreinformationin
amodalform—orinotherwords,theymakeextensiveuseofpseudo-modalmemory—
tocompensateforthelackofmodalmemory, butthiscomeswithanumberofdisad-
—24—