Aphantasia,SDAM,andEpisodicMemory 11
is, Schwitzgebel’s) against the existence of aphantasia. After that, sections 4 to 6
assesstheimplicationsofaphantasiaforthenotionofepisodicmemory,andsection7
concludes that episodic memory is not a natural kind (in the sense identified above)
and suggests an alternative, “modular” conceptualization of the semantic/episodic
distinction.
2
Usually,FrancisGalton(1880)iscreditedwithbeingthefirsttorecognizetheex-
istence of people who claim not to experience imagery. Research on the phenomenon
hasbeenscarce,however,andmostlyofdubiousquality,untilveryrecently. (Watkins
2018 reviews some of the earlier literature.) In 2010, Adam Zeman and colleagues
published a paper reporting on a 65-year old man who had lost the ability to expe-
rience imagery but who otherwise functioned normally2. 21 people contacted Zeman
after that, writing that they didn’t experience imagery either, but that their “con-
dition” had been lifelong. These 21 individuals were sent a questionnaire, which all
of them filled in. The results were published in Zeman, Dewar, & Della Sala (2015),
which coined the term “congenital aphantasia”. (Until the publication of that pa-
per “non-imager” was the most common term for someone lacking mental imagery,
but it has since been replaced by “aphantasic”.) Of the participants in this initial,
small study, about half reported that they did not have imagery in any modality;
half experienced involuntary flashes of imagery; the majority experienced imagery
in dreams; the majority had difficulties with autobiographic memory; and about a
quarter reported having family members with aphantasia.
The2015publicationreceivedalotofpublicattention(albeitmostlyinEnglish-
speaking countries)—it was mentioned in the popular press, popular science maga-
zines, and on TV — leading to over 10,000 emails to the research group from people
who believe that they have (something like) aphantasia, or the opposite, hyperphan-
tasia (extremely vivid imagery). More than 2000 of those have filled in complete
questionnaires. The results thereof have been analyzed mostly, but have not been
published yet, except for a few remarks in a post on the research group’s website
(Zeman 2017). In that short report, Adam Zeman writes that the results confirm
the relation with autobiographical memory, as well as the expected relation with
prosopagnosia (a deficiency with regards to facial recognition), and suggests that
“imagery vividness can run in families”.
Aphantasia is defined in Zeman, Dewar, & Della Sala (2015) as “a condition of
reduced or absent voluntary imagery”. This rough definition is ambiguous in three
2 Thiswasnotthefirstreportofsuchacase. Foranearlierexample,seeBasso,Bissiach,
& Luzzatti (1980), which is discussed in section 5 below.
—11—