18 LajosBrons Vol.28
were already pointed at above.
Most tests ignore the possibility of compensating for deficiencies. Mental ro-
tation tests, for example, nearly always allow for various answering strategies that
do not require mental imagery. Secondly, and related to the neglected possibility of
compensation, differencesbetweenlow-andhigh-imagersaremorelikelytobesubtle
than vast and may only be revealed by means of neuroimaging. Thirdly, virtually all
the research on the effects of vividness of imagery until now compares low-imagers
to high-imagers, but it may be the case that low-imagers are more similar to high-
imagers than to non-imagers.
To illustrate the latter, imagine a test that requires the subject to read a single,
short word every once in a while. People who are very good at reading and people
whocanjustbarelyreadarenotlikelytoscoreverydifferentlyonthistest(assuming
that reading skill is not correlated to whatever is tested), but people who cannot
read at all will deviate significantly. Similarly, if a test requires only very basic im-
agery, low-imagers and high-imagers are not likely to score significantly differently,
but non-imagers will (except if they can compensate for the lack of imagery).
ResearchintoaphantasiaandSDAMandtheireffectsisstillinitsinfancy. More
research is needed, but future research also needs to take the above three method-
ological points into account.
Schwitzgebel’s skeptical conclusion (4) about aphantasia follows from premises
(1)to(3), butwehavefoundthatallthreeofthesepremisesarefalse. Consequently,
his argument against aphantasia fails. If there is no successful argument against
aphantasia we should take the condition seriously and consider its implications for
ourconceptualizationsofandresearchonmemory. Thisisthetopicoftheremainder
of this paper.
4
One of the most influential distinctions of kinds of memory is that between se-
mantic and episodic memory by Endel Tulving (1972; 1983). Semantic memory is
memoryoffacts;episodicmemoryis—moreorless—memoryofexperiencedepisodes.
In (1972), Tulving defined episodic memory as memory of what/where/when,
adding the phenomenology of the “recollective experience” in (1983). The original
what/where/when conceptualization remains influential, however, and in laboratory
tests episodic memory is often operationalized as memory of visual stimuli. Conse-
quently, the concept of “episodic memory” has become somewhat muddled.
In Elements of Episodic Memory (1983), Tulving listed 28 “diagnostic features”
of episodic and semantic memory (see his table 3.1 on page 35). These features are
a rather varied bunch including items like usefulness, likelihood of realization in ar-
—18—