20 LajosBrons Vol.28
forsemanticmemoryimplythatepisodicmemoryisself-centeredand, therefore,per-
sonal,whilesemanticmemory—lackinganysimilarkindoffocus—isuncenteredand
impersonal.
The role of feature (6), affect, in episodic memory is often alluded to as the
“warmth and intimacy” that suffuses remembering (James 1890: 239). Supposedly,
we feel an emotional attachment to our episodic memories, while semantic memories
are more emotionally neutral.
The eight listed features can thus be grouped into three different contrasting
pairs: (i) modal/amodal, (ii) personal/impersonal, and (iii) affective/neutral. Of
these three, the modal/amodal contrast appears to be most fundamental. It may
also be the most problematic.
In Mental Time Travel (2016), Kourken Michaelian shows that episodic mem-
ory is mental time travel into the past and that mental time travel in general is a
kind of imagination. Hence, episodic memory is imagination of the experienced past.
But episodic memory is modal memory and, therefore, a kind of modal imagination,
and modal imagination is mental imagery. By implication, people who lack mental
imagery—that is, aphantasics—lack modal memory, but there is nothing that indi-
cates that aphantasics lack personal and/or affective memory (even if some of them
have deficiencies—such as SDAM—in one or both of these respects).
According to Lawrence Barsalou (1999; 2009) and other advocates of “situated
cognition” and similar theories there is no independent amodal memory, however.
Eventhememoryofwordsandconceptsinvolvesimagery-likesimulationsofrelevant
situations in memory. If this is true, then aphantasics really do have mental im-
agerycorrespondingtotheirconsciousthoughts,butsomehowjustaren’tawareofit.
Rebecca Keogh and Joel Pearson’s (2018) findings (see above), as well as the differ-
encesinbrainactivationpatterns betweenlow-and high-imagers (Logieet al. 2011),
and the documented neural correlates of semantic and episodic memory, which are
often operationalized more or less as amodal and modal memory (e.g. Wiggs, Weis-
berg, & Martin 1998) all seem to contradict this suggestion, however9. Furthermore,
even if it is true that the vast majority of people always activate modal memory or
imagery-likesimulations,thisdoesn’timplythatallpeoplenecessarilydoso. Neither
Barsalou, nor anyone else has investigated whether aphantasics also activate some
kind of (unconscious) mental imagery when processing apparently amodal informa-
tion. Given the—admittedly still scarce— available evidence, it seems more likely
that aphantasics (as well as people with SDAM) lack modal memory indeed.
9 More specifically, it suggests that aphantasics don’t have unconscious imagery that
moreorlesssystematicallycorrespondswith theirconsciousmentalcontent. Itdoes.
however, not imply that aphantasics don’t have unconscious imagery at all. See also
below in this section and section 6.
—20—