Aphantasia,SDAM,andEpisodicMemory 23
Table 3 ... and neutral/affective memory
amodal pseudo-modal modal
impersonal (a) (b) (c)
neutral
(d) (e) (f)
personal
affective (g) (h) (i)
personal and personal amodal memory, Hung-Yu Chen and colleagues (2017) have
recently shown that impersonal and personal modal memory—that is, (c) and (f)—
activate different brain networks.
Personal semantics as conceptualized by Renoult et al. includes self-knowledge,
which “has most often been operationalized as the summary of one’s personality
traits” and “because they focus on self image, these aspects of [personal semantics]
may be strongly influenced by emotional and social factors during encoding and re-
trieval” (555). While this suggests a link between personal and affective memory,
Mark Wheeler (2000) summarizes empirical evidence that dissociates personal from
affective memory. There are patients with prefrontal cortical damage (including the
subjects of the psychosurgical procedure of frontal leucotomy that was performed in
thefirsthalfofthe20thcentury)thathavemoreorlessnormallyfunctioningpersonal
memory, but that lack an interest in those personal memories. What these patients
lack is a sense of their own self-continuity and an interest in themselves as persons.
And consequently, “although the patients knew all of the personal facts . . . that
theydidbefore,thefactswereexperiencedwithalackof‘warmthandintimacy’that
William James had attributed to the way humans typically think about their lives”
(Wheeler 2000: 602).
Stanley Klein and Shaun Nichols (2012) describe a more recent case of a traffic
accident victim R.B. who retained personal memory, but who (temporarily) lost his
sense of “ownership” of his personal memories. However, R.B. experienced “full
ownership” of new memories formed after the accident (and gradually recovered
ownership of earlier memories) and probably because of that did not lack a sense
of self-continuity as in the prefrontal cortical damage cases described by Wheeler.
Nevertheless, both kinds of cases show that there can be personal memory without
affective memory. The converse—that is, impersonal affective memory—appears less
likely (and I’m not aware of any evidence for its existence), so this would mean that
we only need to add one row to table 2, resulting in table 3.
While the evidence for the affective/personal distinction implies the need for a
third row in the table, it does not specify whether that row crosses with all columns.
In other words, it still needs to be established whether the affective dimension is in-
dependent from the modal dimension, and whether affective memory can be amodal
(g) or pseudo-modal (h) as well as modal (i), similar to personal and impersonal
memory. Although paradigm cases of affective memory appear to be modal, there is
—23—