28 LajosBrons Vol.28
hippocampusisessentialfor(keyaspectsof)episodicmemory,itplaysanequallyim-
portant role in a large number of other cognitive contexts, and there is no consensus
about the exact function of the hippocampus. In a recent review Arne Ekstrom and
Charan Ranganath (2017) provisionally conclude that the hippocampus’s function
may be to cut up experience into spatial, temporal, or other kinds of chunks that
have low variance internally. Episodes would be one kind of such chunk (but only
one kind). Furthermore, there is evidence that hippocampal damage is related to a
deficiency of imagery (reviewed in Ekstrom and Rangarath 2017), and Palombo and
colleagues (2015) found a subtly reduced right hippocampal volume in their SDAM
cases.
However, “the hippocampus is all over the cognitive map” (Ekstrom and Ran-
garath2017)anditsfunctionis(orfunctionsare)notnearlyspecificenoughtoidentify
it as the underlying causal mechanism of episodic memory. Moreover, the cases of
deficientaffectivememorydescribedbyWheeler(2000)andKleinandNichols(2012)
involved prefrontal cortical damage suggesting that the prefrontal cortexrather than
the hippocampus is essential for affective memory. In other words, for causal unifi-
cation of episodic memory, the role of the hippocampus is both too broad and too
narrow.
Theproblemofnarrownesscanbeavoided,however,bydissociatingtheaffective
dimension from episodic memory. The cases of deficient affective memory then have
normalepisodicmemoryandhaveanunrelatedmemorydeficiency. GiventhatCheng
and Werning’s definition does not explicitly involve an affective aspect, this response
is available to them. Episodic memory would then be (f), personal modal mem-
ory, and (i), the kind of memory that is more commonly identified as paradigmatic
episodic memory, would be a combination of episodic-memory-as-(f) and affective
memory15. This doesn’t solve the broadness problem, however, and given that the
causal unification criterion requires the kind to be the largest class that shares the
supposed causal mechanism, this problem appears to be fatal. The hippocampus
cannot possibly provide the kind of causal unification required.
Furthermore, even if, despite these objections, the hippocampus would be iden-
tified as the underlying causal mechanism of episodic memory, this would not be
sufficienttoclassifyepisodicmemoryasanaturalkind. Theothercriterion,explana-
toryunification,requiresthatthethingsthatmakeupthesupposednaturalkindalso
share a large set of inductively and explanatorily relevant properties (due to the un-
derlying causal mechanism). There is no such set of properties, however. Impersonal
modal memory(c)hasalmostnothing incommonwithpersonal amodalmemory(d)
or affective amodal memory (g), and certainly nothing inductively or explanatorily
15 Ifepisodicmemoryis(f),thenitmaybethecasethatmanyanimalshavefull-fledged
episodic memory. At least, replay in rats seems to be modal and personal, and thus
(f) (e.g. Buhry, Azizi, & Cheng 2011).
—28—