14 LajosBrons Vol.28
and is in need of further research. Nevertheless, the available evidence makes the
idea that aphantasia doesn’t exist and that non-imagers are mistaken about their
own experiences increasingly implausible. It is to this skeptical idea that we turn
next.
3
While there has been heated debate about the status, role, and nature of men-
tal imagery since the 1970s, both sides in that debate share a conception of mental
imagery as well as the belief that the experience and phenomenology of imagery are
universal (e.g. Thomson 2007). For example, Daniel Dennett wrote that “nobody
denies that when we engage in mental imagery we seem to be making pictures in
our head” (2002: 189). Given the almost universal acceptance of the idea that we
all share the same kind of mental imagery, it should not come as a surprise that the
rejection of that very idea by people who claim not to experience imagery at all has
been met with considerable skepticism and even hostility. As Bill Faw observed:
Muchofthecurrentimagingliteratureeitherdeniestheexistenceofwakefulnon-
mental imagers, viewsnon-imagers motivationally as “repressors”or “neurotic”,
or acknowledges them but does not fully incorporate them into their models.
(2009: 45)
One of the most outspoken recent skeptics is Eric Schwitzgebel. The experience
ofimageryisarecurringthemeinaseriesofarticlesontheunreliabilityofintrospec-
tion (2002; 2008; 2011; 2012a; 2012b). According to Schwitzgebel, “we are prone to
grosserror,eveninfavorablecircumstancesofextendedreflection,aboutourongoing
emotional, visual, and cognitive phenomenology” (2008: 259). His argument is that
thereshouldbevastdifferencesintheabilitiesbetweenimagersandnon-imagers(i.e.
aphantasics),butthereisnoevidenceofsuchdifferencesandgiventhatintrospection
is evasive and indeterminate, the most plausible explanation for this lack of evidence
is that self-described non-imagers are mistaken about their own imaging abilities.
Spelled out, the argument consists of three premises and a conclusion:
1) Mental imagery is evasive and indeterminate. “My experiences flee and scatter
as I reflect” (2008: 267), and it is unclear, for example, how much you can visu-
alizeatonce. Becauseofthis, questions about thedetailsofimageryarehardto
answer(contrarytoquestionsaboutthedetailsofperception),andconsequently,
introspection of imagery is unreliable.
2) “If differences in imagery ability are as vast” as suggested by the self-reports
of aphantasics and hyperphantasics, then “we should presumably expect vast
SDAM, respectively.
—14—