Aphantasia,SDAM,andEpisodicMemory 27
some kind of unconscious modal memory when remembering does not imply that
aphantasics don’t have unconscious modal memory at all. See section 4.)
Ifsemanticmemoryis(a)andepisodicmemoryis(i)orsomeotherunionofcells
in table 3 that excludes more than just (a)—as in the what/where/when interpreta-
tion and in Cheng and Werning’s definition—then it is unclear how the remaining
varietiesofmemoryshouldbeclassified. Theseremainingvarietiesincludeimpersonal
modal memory (c) and its semanticized counterpart (b), as well as personal amodal
memory (d) and its affective counterpart (g), but depending on the exact definition
of episodic memory, they may also include (e), (f), and (h). Denying the existence of
these varieties is hardly an option given the evidence reviewed in previous sections,
butthatdoesn’tautomaticallyimplythattheyarereallydifferentkindsofmemoryin
addition to episodic and semantic memory: they might be variants or applications of
episodic memory that just don’t make use of everything episodic memory can do, for
example. In that case, someone lacking some of these variants or applications would
have defective episodic memory. (“Defective” in the sense that some of the functions
of episodic memory don’t “work”.) The plausibility of this suggestion depends on
whether it can be shown that a single mental faculty is involved in everything but
(a) and that aphantasics and people with SDAM have a defect in this single mental
faculty explaining their lack of modal memory. In other words, it depends on ex-
planatory and causal unification of episodic memory, and thus, on whether episodic
memory is a natural kind.
7
Something is a natural kind—in the here relevant sense—if (1) the entities be-
longing to that kind share a large set of inductively and explanatorily relevant prop-
erties and (2) that kind is the largest class whose members share those properties
due to some underlying causal mechanism14. These two criteria (1 and 2) are indi-
vidually necessary and collectively sufficient conditions for attributing natural kind
status. The first criterion demands explanatory unification of the kind in question;
the second criterion demands its causal unification.
AccordingtoChengandWerning(2016)episodicmemorysatisfiesbothcriteria,
and therefore, is a natural kind. The underlying causal mechanism—criterion (2)—
they identify is the hippocampus. However, while there is broad consensus that the
thing like crypto-modal memory (although I’m not aware of any evidence for this),
but even if this is the case, the notion appears to have little explanatory value, and
adding a fourth column to table 3 to accommodateit is, therefore, not necessary.
14 Asobservedinfootnote1,onecouldfurtherweakenthenotionofnaturalkindsbygiv-
ing up (or significantly relaxing) one of these criteria, but the resulting notion would
almostcertainlybetooweaktobeexplanatorilyuseful. Andtherefore,whethersuch
kinds could be justifiably considered natural kinds is doubtful.
—27—