Major Systems Major Systems
ELECTRICAL ENVIRONMENTAL CONTROL SYSTEM
• The electrical system includes four regulated • The aircraft’s environmental control system (ECS)
transformer rectifier units, five AC generators, is capable of stabilizing the cockpit environment
controls, and conversion equipment needed from a heat soak temperature condition at external
to satisfy and control the diversified power ambient temperature of +120°F (+49°C) to
requirements of the various electrical and +84°F (+28.8°C) within 30 minutes from cooling
electronic equipment and other systems. operation ECS start. The ECS is capable of
Secondary distribution uses electronic and increasing the cabin average temperature from
electromechanical circuit breakers. -22°F (-30°C) to +41°F (+5°C) within 20 minutes.
• Four 40/50-kVA oil-cooled, three-phase AC • Cargo-floor heating is accomplished by using hot
generators constitute the primary AC power source. air circulating through an underfloor manifold.
Each engine-driven generator has an overtorque • A forced-air cooling system is provided for the
shaft d isconnect and an individual generator flight-station displays and certain rack-mounted
control unit. A fifth 40/50-kVA air-cooled, three- avionics and electrical equipment.
phase AC generator is mounted on the auxiliary • A system for pressurizing the flight station
power unit as an additional AC power source. and cargo compartment is supplied by engine
• Two 24-volt, 42-ampere-hour (beginning of life), compressor bleed air. This electronically controlled
sealed, lead acid, and maintenance-free batteries pneumatic system is capable of maintaining
are installed in a battery compartment in the lower a maximum of 8,000-foot cabin altitude at
left forward fuselage. A control switch in the flight 32,200-foot flight altitude. The aircraft is
station disconnects the batteries from the electrical pressurized and depressurized in accordance with
system. With fully charged batteries, sufficient a preprogrammed schedule and under rate control
battery power is available to operate standby while in the automatic mode. A separate backup
instruments and other flight-critical components for manual control of the pressurization system
approximately 30 minutes after complete loss of provides outflow valve operation in case of a
primary aircraft power. When required, one battery failure in the automatic system.
can provide electrical power for APU starting.
• Four regulated 200-ampere transformer rectifiers FUEL SYSTEM
convert AC power to DC power. Two 1-kVA • The fuel system uses a common cross-ship
inverters provide uninterruptable electrical manifold that serves as a refueling system, a fuel
power for the essential avionics bus and the supply crossfeed, a direct feed system, a ground
main avionics bus. defueling system, and a fuel jettisoning system.
• Regulated power supplies (RPSs) provide filtered The fuel system consists of tanks, pumps, piping,
and regulated DC power to the flight station valves, flowmeters, strainers, and quantity
consoles. The RPS is powered by two independent gage units.
28-VDC power sources. • Fuel system design and performance is based on
the use of fuel conforming to JP-8 (MIL-T-83133).
• The system is compatible with JP-4, JP-5, Jet A,
Jet A-1, and Jet B fuels with or without anti-icing
26 27