Major Systems Major Systems
additive. Deviations and flight restrictions are • The auxiliary system furnishes hydraulic power for
required for use of some fuels other than JP-8. normal ramp and cargo door operation. The system
• Group A provisions are provided on the lower side also provides pressure for wheel brake operation,
of each outer wing at outer-wing station 81.0 for NLG extension, and down lock in the event of
optional installation of pylons and tanks. When the utility system failure.
tanks/pylons are installed, each tank has a usable
fuel capacity of 1,379 U.S. gallons (9,377 pounds ENHANCED CARGO HANDLING SYSTEM (ECHS)
or 18,754 pounds per aircraft). • The ECHS allows the load-crew to control all
• The aircraft has the capability for single-point aspects of logistic and airdrop operations by
refueling (SPR) which is integrated into the providing computer-controlled event sequencing
fuel management system and controlled via of all onload, offload, airdrop, and emergency
the fuel management panel. Refueling quantities functions from a single location. The multifunction
can be set for each tank. A manual over-the-wing control/display, located at the loadmaster position,
fuel-filler cap is installed in each main tank. provides control and display of all ECHS functions.
• Defueling normally is through the ground The aircraft is capable of performing aerial delivery
single-point refueling system using the fuel missions using manual, computer, or combined
boost and dump pumps to supply pressure. computer- and manual-controlled modes.
Defuel quantities can be set for each tank at
the fuel management panel. DEFENSIVE SYSTEMS
• Fuel dump controls are located on the fuel • Missile Warning System, AN/AAR-47
management panel located in the flight station. • Countermeasures Dispensing System, AN/ALE-47
•Receiver P3I provisions are available for • Radar Warning Receiver, AN/ALR-56M
aerial refueling.
• Tanker P3I provisions are included.
HYDRAULIC SYSTEMS
• Three separate hydraulic systems are controlled
by engine-mounted or electrically driven pumps.
The pumps for the booster system are mounted on
engines three and four, and the pumps for the
utility system are mounted on engines one and two.
The auxiliary system is powered by an electrically
driven pump located in the aft fuselage. Normal
operating pressure is 3,000 pounds per square inch.
• The booster system operates one-half of each
control surface actuator.
• The utility system operates the landing gear
(including doors and steering), wing flaps,
wheel brakes, and one-half of each control
surface actuator.
28 29