Introduction Introduction
climb time is reduced by up to 50 percent, cruising The C-130J-30, the stretched/advanced version
altitude is up to 40 percent higher, and range is up to of the Hercules, offers operators 55 feet of cargo
40 percent longer. With new engines and props, the compartment length – an additional 15 feet over the
J has set 54 world records for rate of climb, cruise original “short” aircraft. The additional 15 feet is
speed, and both distance and altitude with payload. provided by inserting a 100-inch forward and an
80-inch aft plug to the fuselage. This translates into
30 percent more usable volume for increased seating,
litters, pallets, or airdrop platforms. This additional
capability provides significant advantages when
transporting personnel or delivering priority cargo by
reducing the number of sorties needed to complete
the mission.
In addition to the significant increases in
operational capability and performance, the C-130J
offers a greater value when compared to any other
tactical airlifter: System reliability and maintainability
are improved by up to 50 percent; maintenance
man-hours per flight hour are decreased by up to
68 percent; and flight and maintenance manpower
The C-130J incorporates these major improvements: are reduced by up to 50 percent, resulting in a
47 percent lower squadron operating and support cost.
• A new propulsion system featuring four
4,591 pshp Rolls-Royce AE2100D3 engines
and composite, six-bladed Dowty Aerospace
R391 propellers with significantly improved
fuel economy and high-hot performance.
• Two-person flight station including four
multifunctional LCD displays; two holographic
head-up displays (HUD); and electronic, digital
readouts for aircraft operating, communicating,
and navigating systems. The displays and aircraft
general lighting are compatible with the USAF’s
night-vision imaging system.
• A 1553 data bus, two mission computers,
and two backup bus interface units provide dual
redundancy for the Hercules’ systems. In addition,
the computers provide for an integrated diagnostics
system that monitors and records the status of the
aircraft’s structure and systems.
2 3