Recent Capability/Performance Upgrades Recent Capability/Performance Upgrades
Subsequent to the USAF Operational Test • Center Wing Box improvement to provide
and Evaluation Acceptance of the C-130J combat Enhanced Service Life (ESL) by strengthening
delivery aircraft in 2006, several performance structural components such as Hat Sections
enhancements by Lockheed Martin Aeronautics (stringers), Beam Caps and Webs, Wing Attach
were developed, tested, verified, qualified, Fittings, and Engine Truss Mounts. The ESL wing
accepted, and incorporated into the basic aircraft was originally developed for the USAF Special
configuration. These include: Operations C-130s in support of Severe
Mission Operations.
• Terrain Awareness and Warning System (TAWS),
a forward-looking awareness and warning system, • Reduced Vertical Separation Minima (RVSM) for
for improved in-flight situational awareness. The worldwide operations in CNS/ATM controlled
TAWS operates in conjunction with the existing airspace. Access to RVSM airspace increases
Ground Collision Avoidance System (GCAS) as true air speed and range while reducing fuel
independent complementary systems providing consumption, e.g., enhances long-range
visual and obstacle Voice Warning Alerts (VWA) cruise performance.
to the crew.
• Data Transfer and Diagnostic System (DTADS)
• Identification Friend or Foe (IFF) Transponder Mode S Interface Unit for maintenance management
with Enhanced Surveillance for use in civil of critical aircraft systems using a Windows
Communications, Navigation, and Surveillance/Air Operating System. DTADS encompasses in-flight
Traffic Management (CNS/ATM) airspace. The IFF and post-flight analysis, ground maintenance
has growth capability to Mode 5. processing, structural health monitoring, and
engine life management. DTADS is scheduled
• Communications, Navigation, and Identification to become available in 2010.
(CNI) common software upgrade developed for
all customers including updated chute ballistic
tables, new track offset, additional drift down
performance pages, and re-host of the Takeoff Survivability Options
and Landing Data (TOLD) from the CNI to the
Mission Computer (MC).
• Small Arms Armor Kit, available as Customer-
• TOLD re-hosted in MC Operational Flight Furnished Equipment (CFE), provides protection
Program (OFP), enabling additional and enhanced for the pilot and co-pilot, crew station and
capabilities pertaining to charts and calculations bunk, forward and aft loadmaster stations,
for hot/high takeoffs, assault landing weight, paratroop doors, nose wheel well, and liquid
modified minimum field length maximum effort oxygen converter.
takeoff, climb gradients, wind corrections, and
temperature deviation expansion to ISA +/-45°C. • Explosive Suppressant Tank Foam is available as
CFE for the main and auxiliary fuel tanks, which
aids in protecting against ballistic penetration
and lightning strikes.
4 5