MBDA
STRATEGIC HIGHLIGHTS
Business trends
f MBDA revenues grew 10.4% in 2024 to reach €4,913 million. Missile production capacity was up 33% year-on-
year, and the group expects its production volumes to double in 2025 compared to 2023.
f The group and its subsidiary Matra Électronique (MEL), which specialises in the manufacture of high-precision
electronic equipment, created a centre of excellence for defence electronics in Venette (near Compiègne) at
the end of 2024.
f MBDA and Leonardo signed a letter of intent in December 2024 to develop a directed energy laser weapon
firing unit, complementing the solutions developed by the group in the United Kingdom.
f In December 2024, MBDA also acquired Safran’s 50% stake in Roxel (solid propulsion systems for rockets and
missiles) and integrated the company as a wholly-owned subsidiary.
Home markets (France, Germany, United Kingdom, Italy, Spain)
f TAURUS Systems (a joint venture between MBDA and Saab) signed a contract in December 2024 with the
German Army for the maintenance and technological upgrade of the TAURUS air-launched cruise missile,
ensuring its operational availability until 2045.
f In March 2025, France, the United Kingdom and Italy ordered 218 additional Aster 15 and Aster 30 missiles
from Eurosam, an economic interest grouping (EIG) between MBDA France, MBDA Italia and Thales. As part
of this contract, the three countries asked the EIG to accelerate its production rates, which are expected to
decrease from 42 months in 2022 to less than 18 months in 2026, enabling a 50% increase in production.
f The group signed a contract with the Italian Army in June 2025 to develop a very short-range air defence
missile against fighter aircraft, helicopters and small drones, called FULGUR. The first delivery of the missile
and its portable launcher is scheduled for 2028.
f The UK Ministry of Defence awarded MBDA a contract in August 2025 to produce six Land Ceptor medium-
range air defence systems, which use CAMM missiles. These systems form the architecture of the British Sky
Sabre air defence system.
f MBDA won a contract from the Italian Navy’s National Armament Directorate in September 2025 to begin
production of the new-generation TESEO MK2/E anti-ship missile. This missile will equip several Italian Navy
ships, such as FREMM EVO frigates and PPA offshore patrol vessels.
f In September 2025, the French defence procurement agency (DGA) entrusted the development of a sovereign
high-power directed energy weapon demonstrator to a consortium of French companies led by MBDA France
as part of the SYDERAL contract.
Export markets
f The group secured two contracts for the acquisition of Mistral 3 short-range surface-to-air missiles in 2025:
with the Cypriot National Guard in May and with Estonia in July.
f In June 2025, the Swedish Defence Materiel Administration (FMV) ordered AKERON MP anti-tank missiles
and their launchers from MBDA. This system includes a band 2 IR camera, a laser rangefinder and a modular
architecture to enable its integration into combat vehicles.
f In September 2025, Denmark selected MBDA’s SAMP/T NG air and missile defence system over Raytheon’s
(RTX) Patriot system, and may order two batteries.
Technology and Innovation
f After an initial ground test firing in February 2025, MBDA successfully fired the AKERON LP missile from a
Tiger helicopter in March 2025.
f At the Paris Air Show in June 2025, MBDA presented its One Way Effector project, a new long-range munition
for mass combat.
144