ATOS
STRATEGIC HIGHLIGHTS
Business trends
f Atos generated revenues of €9.6 billion in 2024, down 10.4% year-on-year (-5.4% on a like-for-like basis and
at constant exchange rates). The Eviden division (-9.5%) was weighed down by the Digital segment (contract
terminations) and the Big Data & Security segment (decline in cybersecurity activity). Only the Advanced
Computing segment recorded growth, with project deliveries in Denmark and Germany. The Tech Foundations
division (-11.3%) suffered from customer withdrawals and a decline in demand for services. However, after
several years of losses, the group’s net income returned to positive territory in 2024.
f Atos completed its financial restructuring programme at the end of 2024, including €1.6 billion in new financing
and the sale of its Worldgrid subsidiary for €270 million. The group now has no debt maturities before the end
of 2029.
f In May 2025, Atos presented a new strategic and transformation plan called Genesis, aimed at reviving
revenue growth (with revenues expected to reach between €9 billion and €10 billion by 2028), and improving
profitability with an operating margin of around 10%.
f In June 2025, Atos accepted a €410 million offer from the French State Holdings Agency (APE) to acquire
its Advanced Computing segment (Eviden division), which includes supercomputers, quantum computing
activities, advanced cybersecurity solutions and certain critical skills in embedded AI. This acquisition aims to
prevent foreign control over these sensitive technologies, which are essential for nuclear deterrence, military
simulations and strategic research. However, contrary to initial plans, the Mission-Critical Systems (MCS)
activities were not sold and remain within Atos’ scope. The transaction is expected to be finalised in 2026.
Home market
f In addition to supercomputers and advanced computing, Atos’ defence activities include the provision
of command systems (SCORPION programme), secure communications (Auxylium, Rafale F4) and C4I
infrastructure for the Armed Forces through its MCS segment. The group also offers cybersecurity and
sovereign encryption solutions.
f In December 2024, the French Space Agency (CNES) tasked Atos with upgrading its LVCUGEN flight
software for satellites and spacecraft and to maintain it for five years.
f In March 2025, Atos partnered with Esri France to offer solutions combining digital twins and geolocated data
for various sectors, including defence and security. The aim is to provide immersive simulation and planning
tools with high added value, particularly for operational training, crisis management and cybersecurity.
Export markets
f In November 2024, Atos signed a €165 million contract extension with Eurocontrol, a pan-European civil and
military organisation, to continue providing critical infrastructure monitoring and cybersecurity services for
airspace and aviation management in Europe.
f Through Eviden, Atos signed a €50 million contract in Serbia in April 2025 to develop the country’s artificial
intelligence capabilities. The group will provide various AI services and capabilities, including a centre of
excellence and a high-performance computing platform.
f In September 2025, Atos secured a contract worth up to €326 million over four years to provide cybersecurity
services to various European Union bodies, agencies and institutions. The group will partner with Leonardo
on this programme.
Technology and Innovation
f As part of its new strategic plan, Atos plans to invest €500 million in R&D over the next four years. R&D work
will focus on emerging technologies and next-generation solutions (generative AI, agentic AI, cybersecurity,
quantum computing, etc.).
21