LOFT ORBITAL
STRATEGIC HIGHLIGHTS
Business trends
f Founded in the United States in 2017 by a French-American team, Loft Orbital (also known as Loft) offers the
entire management of space missions for its customers. It purchases standardised satellite platforms from
third-party operators, and has developed a payload adapter, called the Hub, as well as the Cockpit software
for operating payloads. Loft Orbital also prebooks places on launchers and manages launch and in-orbit
operations.
f The customers’ payloads can be integrated into a satellite dedicated to their mission, carrying other payloads
(rideshare) or forming part of a constellation. Customers can also access Loft Orbital resources (satellites and
payloads) using their own software or the Cockpit software.
f Loft Orbital owns and operates the YAM (Yet Another Mission) satellites. The YAM-8 satellite, launched in
March 2025, uses the Longbow platform, an upgraded version of Airbus’ Arrow 150 platform that can carry
more complex payloads. The company has sold missions on more than 30 satellites since its creation,
representing more than €500 million in contracts signed with private customers (60%) and institutional
customers (NASA, ESA, French Space Agency CNES, etc.; 40%).
f Having already raised €140 million since its creation, Loft Orbital raised €170 million in January 2025 from
several investors including Tikehau Capital, Axial Partners, Bpifrance and Singapore-based investment
company Temasek. Loft Orbital aims to increase its satellite launches from a few per year to more than 10.
Home markets (United States, France)
f In the United States, the company operates in California and Colorado. The Loft Federal subsidiary, created
in early 2023, is dedicated to government and defence operators in the U.S. market. The launch of the first
satellites in a constellation of 10 units for the Space Development Agency is scheduled for 2025.
f Loft Orbital is one of 12 players selected by the U.S. Space Force in May 2025 as part of the STEP 2.0
(Space Test Experiments Platform) contract, with a ceiling value of $237 million (€210 million) over 10 years.
The objective is to supply and operate small satellite platforms capable of carrying various sensors and military
equipment for conducting tests in orbit. Contract notifications are due to begin in January 2026.
f Based in Toulouse, the group’s French subsidiary generated revenues of €74 million in 2024 and employs
around 100 people. It sources its satellites, equipment and software from French space industry players,
including Airbus and Thales Alenia Space.
f The development of the DESIR (Démonstrateur des Éléments Souverains en Imagerie Radar) demonstrator, a
€50 million project led by CNES, was entrusted in June 2025 to Loft Orbital, in partnership with Thales Alenia
Space and Portugal’s Tekever. Loft Orbital will be responsible for the platform and integration of the space
system, while Thales Alenia Space will be responsible for the payload.
Export markets
f Loft Orbital and UAE-based Marlan Space joined forces in August 2024 to create a joint venture in the United
Arab Emirates, named Orbitworks. A 5,000 m² factory is under construction in Abu Dhabi, with the aim of
producing up to 50 satellites per year and beginning launches in 2026.
f The first of 10 Earth observation satellites from Canadian company EarthDaily Analytics (EDA) was launched in
June 2025, with the entire constellation scheduled to be operational in 2026. Loft Orbital is responsible for the
construction, launch and operation of the satellites.
f In February 2025, Loft Orbital partnered with German company Helsing to develop and deploy a constellation
of satellites equipped with various payloads (cameras, RF sensors, etc.) and an on-board AI solution in low
Earth orbit. The aim is to provide real-time information for defence and security missions (border surveillance,
troop movement tracking, protection of sensitive sites, etc.). The launch of the first satellites is scheduled for
2026.
141