FOREWORD
Paris, January 1, 2026
The Defence Industry Directorate (DID), initiated as part of the French defence procurement
agency (DGA) ‘Impulsion’ project, has now been in operation for over a year.
Within the DGA, the DID guarantees the continuity, quality, performance and resilience of French
defence companies. It plays an essential role in preserving France’s strategic autonomy and
promoting competitiveness in the defence industry.
It supports French defence companies, whether large groups, mid-sized companies or SMEs, in
their development and industrial strategies, and helps them to self-protect, innovate and invest to
meet the needs of the armed forces. It also supports them in their export efforts, advising them
and facilitating their dealings with the DGA’s International Cooperation and Export Directorate
(DICE).
The DID ensures that France has the sovereign industrial and technological capabilities needed
to respond to the geopolitical situation and achieve the desired level of strategic autonomy, both
now and in the long term. It encourages partnerships between the French State, local authorities,
companies, research laboratories and the armed forces. It also ensures that these principles are
applied at the European level, through partnerships, negotiations on EU industrial policies and
dialogue with our European counterparts.
This new 2026 edition of the International Defence Companies notebook is published in light of
these issues.
This publication provides key data from publicly available sources, for a selection of international
companies chosen each year according to their main activities in the defence sector.
In this regard, Anduril, Czechoslovak Group (CSG), Delair, FN Browning Group, Hemeria,
Sabena Technics and UkrOboronProm have been included for the first time in this 2026 edition
while Diehl Defence, FNSS, Israel Aerospace Industries (IAI), Kawasaki Heavy Industries (KHI)
andt Rafael have been re-introduced.
The notebook should in no way be considered as reflecting the opinions or positions of the DGA,
nor of Xerfi Specific, which contributed to its preparation.
A digital version of the notebook, both in French and English, is available on the armament
website at www.armement.defense.gouv.fr.
I wish you a pleasant reading.
Ingénieur en chef des mines
Benoit Laroche de Roussane
Director, Defence Industry Directorate, DGA
4