GENERAL ATOMICS
STRATEGIC HIGHLIGHTS
Business trends
f General Atomics posted revenues of around $3.1 billion (€3 billion) in 2022 (latest figure available). In 2024,
the group delivered one MQ-9A Reaper Extended Range UCAV to the U.S. Marine Corps and the second of
16 MALE Protector RG Mk1 UAVs (armed version of the MQ-9B SkyGuardian UAV) ordered by the Royal Air
Force in 2020.
f In March 2025, the group acquired the American company North Point Defence, which specialises in the
development of signals intelligence (SIGINT) data exploitation software and sensor integration.
f In October 2025, General Atomics and Hanwha agreed to develop and produce the Mojave short take-off and
landing (STOL) UAV for the global market. This partnership followed the successful flight demonstration of the
Mojave in November 2024 from the Republic of Korea Navy’s Dokdo amphibious assault ship.
Home market
f General Atomics is a key drone supplier to the U.S. government. However, U.S. drone requirements are
changing and the U.S. Air Force may stop purchases of MQ-9A Reaper UAVs in the near future, as they may
no longer be suitable against new threats.
f General Dynamics awarded a subcontract to General Atomics in February 2025 for the production of Virginia
Payload Tubes (VPT) missile launch systems for the three future Block VI Virginia-class nuclear-powered attack
submarines. Each submarine will be equipped with two VPTs capable of firing six Tomahawk missiles each.
f In August 2025, General Atomics began flight testing its future XQ-67A UCAV, intended to act as a «loyal
wingman» UCAV to the future sixth-generation F-47 fighter aircraft (Boeing). It is being developed as part of the
U.S. Air Force’s Collaborative Combat Aircraft (CCA) programme, in which the group is competing with Anduril
and its Fury UCAV. The winner of this programme is expected to be announced in 2026.
Export markets
f The group’s export strategy is constrained by the U.S. Administration’s ITAR regulations and Missile Technology
Control Regime (MTCR). Most sales are made under the FMS (Foreign Military Sales) programme and mainly
on the basis of unarmed offers. Western European contries (Spain, France, Italy, the Netherlands and the
United Kingdom) are among the target markets for General Atomics.
f The group recently won three export contracts for its MQ-9B MALE surveillance UAVs. In December 2024,
three MQ-9B SkyGuardian UAVs and two ground control stations were sold to Poland for $310 million
(€287 million) and two MQ-9B SeaGuardian UAVs were sold to Japan. Denmark also acquired four MQ-9B
SkyGuardian UAVs and three ground control stations in July 2025.
f General Atomics and the Belgian Ministry of Defence conducted the maiden flight of the first of four MQ-9B
SkyGuardian MALE surveillance UAVs destined for Belgium at the Belgian Air Force’s Florennes air base in
September 2025.
Technology and Innovation
f The U.S. Navy awarded General Atomics a contract in December 2024 to continue development of its Long
Range Maneuvering Projectile (LRMP), a 155mm guided artillery projectile that can also be used for ISR
missions. The range of this projectile would be 120 km, four times greater than standard artillery projectiles of
this calibre. Until then, this R&D project had been self-financed by the group.
f In January 2025, General Atomics announced that it had successfully completed impact tests on its future
nuclear thermal propulsion (NTP) reactor, which could be used for long-distance space missions (such as
missions to Mars), at NASA’s Marshall Space Flight Center (MSFC) in Huntsville, Alabama.
78