20 | SPACE SYMPOSIUM | 2024
OLEDCOMM
We provide wireless optical communication allowing to
exchange data at very high speed in a completely secure
way without using radio frequency for space applications.
ABOUT US
REFERENCE CUSTOMERS
Oledcomm is a French company in wireless optical communications
Ariane Group, OneWeb, Airbus,
headquartered in Vélizy-Villacoublay, for the space and defense sectors. The
Thales, Dassault located in the Ile-de-France region. technology developed by Oledcomm
It emerged as a spin-off from the enables a new mode of reliable, high-
Paris-Saclay University, specializing speed and secure communications.
APPLICATION SECTORS
OUR OFFER
• Optical communication
We offer wireless optical optical communication for space
• Cable replacement
communication solutions without RF rendezvous applications such as
• Docking solution waves, enabling secure, interference- docking.
free connectivity at very high speeds. • Finally, our technology facilitates the
• Harness removal
transfer of information in areas where
• On the launcher side, we offer inter-
• Communication system the use of radio frequencies is difficult
stage and intra-stage communication
and where there are major wiring
for launcher solutions that allow detachable
problems, particularly in AIT rooms.
connectors to be removed.
• Data security • We are currently developing longer-
• On satellites, we reduce the number
distance communications solutions
of cables by enabling high-speed
for future space applications.
wireless data exchange.
• Between two satellites, we enable
earth COMPETITIVE EDGE
With a portfolio comprising 34 patents .Oledcomm is the first company to have
and 17 years of R&D, Oledcomm can sent LiFi into orbit. The company has
www.oledcomm.net
claim to be a company with a rich won numerous innovation awards :
technical expertise that has enabled BPI Excellence, European Innovation
several significant milestones Award, CES Innovation Award.
Benjamin AZOULAY
CEO
+33 7 85 14 72 64
benjamin.azoulay@oledcomm.net