“Whether long-established or emerging,
our companies stand at the forefront of
FRENCH
innovation in all areas of space.”
Dr. Philippe BAPTISTE
TOUCH
Spanning civil, military, and commercial domains, France has been
playing a pivotal role since the dawn of the space era. Our endeavors
have propelled groundbreaking discoveries and pushed the
boundaries of human achievement alongside our partners. As one of
the world’s few historic space agencies, CNES has paved the way for
the development of French expertise, fueling a blooming ecosystem
through its space programs, in particular the Connect by CNES
MONDAY 8 APRIL 2024
initiative, and ambitious investments like the France 2030 plan.
FROM 8.30 PM Today, I am proud to present this expertise cultivated by French
companies in space, sustained by the strong support of CNES and its
IN THE LAKE TERRACE DINING ROOM partners from French Space Command and public institutions.
Whether long-established or emerging, our companies stand at
OF THE BROADMOOR HOTEL
the forefront of innovation in all areas of space, notably in satellite
manufacturing, launchers, telecommunications, cybersecurity, Earth
observation and space transportation. They successfully compete and
excel on both sides of the Atlantic and in the global market, enabling
scientific achievements with our partners and helping to guarantee
national and European security through their technologies.
In this fast-moving ecosystem, cooperation remains a strong pillar
on which to build our future, as more and more challenges call for a
joint response. Our agencies and companies are eager to drive new
initiatives, develop future innovations and move forward together,
tackling climate change, exploring the universe, supporting national
security efforts, and guaranteeing a sustainable human presence on
ON THE PROGRAM
the Moon.
Fireworks over the lake It is with great pleasure that I invite you to discover the panoply of
French expertise during this 39th Space Symposium. This brochure
showcases the diversity, quality, and expertise of French space
French Touch cocktail reception
players, as well as the partnership and collaboration opportunities
they offer.
Networking with members of the French space ecosystem
#FRENCHTOUCHEVENING
Dr. Philippe BAPTISTE
Chairman and CEO of CNES