Sudhir Kumar CHATURVEDI, Raj SEKHAR, Saikat BANERJEE, Hutanshu KAMAL 192
surveillance, long-range target photography, and designation of targets for other aircraft to
attack [10]. (HALE) Unmanned airborne vehicle (UAV). AURA is being intended to be a
strategic stealth airplane ready to convey laser-guided weapons. Preliminary design pictures
demonstrate it to be fueled by a locally manufactured Kaveri turbofan, and furnished with
inner weapons coves. The vehicle can work at the highest elevation of 30,000 ft out to scope
of 300 km, with an all-up weight of 1.5 tons [10]. The program was begun in 2009 and has
been halted and restarted a few times from that point forward. The most recent restart in
2014 pursues a coordinated effort with the Aeronautical Development Authority (ADA) and
has seen the AURA restored under the name Ghatak (Lethal). The AURA/Ghatak is relied
upon to be flown by numerous Indian offices, for example, the Aeronautical Development
Establishment (ADE), the Defense Electronics Application Laboratory (DEAL), the Defense
Avionics Research Establishment (DARE), and the Gas Turbine Research Establishment
(GTRE) – all divisions of the DRDO a fully developed flying prototype expected to be
completed by 2023 (figure 13).
Figure 13: ARUA/GAHATK being developed jointly by DRDO and ADE
2.7 AUVs
Autonomous Underwater Vehicles (AUVs) are not new. They have been used for
oceanographic studies and for military purposes for several years. But, to we users of
commercial survey services, it seemed that most works had concentrated on the vehicles
themselves rather than on the use of such vehicles in surveying and site investigation.
Nevertheless, the deployment of AUV-bourne sensors appeared to have the potential to solve
the problems of accurately surveying deep-water sites.In the late 1990’s BP surveyors and
site investigation specialists vigorously pursued the technology and its application to oil
industry requirements[18]. In 2001 we conducted our first commercial surveys using the
technology. This paper outlines our experiences, contrasts them against our previous
expectations, and suggests future directions.
Figure 14: MAYA AUV
INCAS BULLETIN, Volume 11, Issue 3/ 2019