191 Comparative Review Study of Military and Civilian Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs)
is mounted at the closures of the tailplane. The retractable landing gear is masterminded in a
tricycle form with two fundamental units installed under the tail blasts and a nose wheel
under the fuselage. With a substantial inside volume, the UAV can convey different payloads
weighing 1,000kg. The Heron TP configuration can likewise be adjusted to an assortment of
missions. The Heron TP's main goal frameworks incorporate oceanic watch radar (MPR),
electronic helps measures (ESM), electronic and interchanges insight (ELINT/COMINT),
and manufactured opening radar (SAR).
It can likewise be introduced with M-19HD multi-sensor electro-optical payload. The
constant symbolism and telemetry information gathered by the payloads are transmitted to
the ground control station utilizing viewable pathway proliferation and satellite interchanges
(SATCOM).
The UAV takes into account concurrent task of various payloads for multi-mission
necessities. India’s purchase of 10 Heron TP proposes that ordinary turboprop-driven
outfitted automatons are of constrained utility to India and its Stealthy turbofan-driven
American Avenger and India's own Ghatak UCAV Projects which will be a genuine distinct
advantage concerning Indian Military.
.
Figure 12: RUSTOM 2 developed by DRDO
As shown in figure 12, Rustom 2 or TAPAS-BH-201 is a MALE (UAV), intended to do
observation and surveillance missions for the Indian Armed Forces. It is equipped for
conveying an alternate mix of payloads including manufactured gap radar, electronic insight
frameworks, and situational mindfulness frameworks. The UAV has autonomy of 24 hours
and is like the American Predator UAV. The UAV is capable of carrying different
combinations of payloads like synthetic aperture radar, electronic intelligence systems, and
situational awareness payloads. DRDO did a test run of Rustom 2 on 25 February 2018, at
the Aeronautical Test Range (ATR) situated in Chalker, Chitradurga region. This was the
first trip of the UAV in client arrangement with higher power motor [4].
2.6 HALE UAVs
The “Eitan” belongs to the HALE (High Altitude Long Endurance) family of UAVs that
participate in missions that require long periods of non-stop air time. Their endurance
addresses the operational need for a presence in a specific area and allows the IAF to
maintain aerial continuity. As a multi-role aircraft, the “Eitan” is responsible for general
INCAS BULLETIN, Volume 11, Issue 3/ 2019