eCos RTOS Overview
Designed from the ground up to meet the needs of deeply embedded applications, eCos places an emphasis on
minimizing the resource footprint and ensuring real-time responsiveness. The RTOS is configurable at the source
code level via a highly intuitive graphical configuration tool, and can easily be tailored to the precise needs of
your application, avoiding the bloat of a traditional operating system.
eCos has been engineered to work in situations where many operating systems simply will not fit. It
accommodates scaling down to a few tens of kilobytes for deployment in low-cost and SoC based designs with
stringent hardware resource constraints and minimal functionality requirements. Equally, it can be easily scaled
up, for example, to include full TCP/IP networking, USB and file system functionality. eCos is fully pre-emptible,
delivering real-time behaviour with minimal interrupt latencies and a rich set of synchronization primitives for full
multi-threading support. SMP is available for multi-core processors and includes CPU thread affinity locking and
spinlocks for fast synchronization. The configurability of eCos extends down to the most fundamental levels,
providing, for example, a choice of scheduling policies; interrupt handling mechanisms and alternative semantics
for dealing with priority inversions.
eCos provides all the drivers, libraries, and services you would expect from an embedded operating system,
alongside compatibility layers to comply with industry standards and assist with application code migration.
Embedded Application
Compatibility Layers Libraries
uITRON
POSIX ISO C Math libstdc++
...
RedBoot
Bootstrap and Debug
Firmware Filesystems Networking Stacks
...
Real-Time Kernel R O M F lash FS J ournaling J FFS 2 F A T M -D O S
S
. ..
B
LW
S D
IP
T CP/IP
Hardware Abstraction layer (HAL) Device Drivers
Varian
A
t
r
H
ch
A
it
L
e c tural HAL E thernet S erial F lash S P I I 2 C U S B I D E . ..
. ..
Platform HAL
Target Hardware
An elegant and highly portable hardware abstraction layer (HAL) allows for rapid porting of eCos to prototype
hardware and deployment in real products. BootUp, RedBoot and eCos share the same HAL infrastructure,
making it possible to bring up both bootstrap, debug firmware and operating system on a new board in one
painless exercise. eCos supports all the main processor families as well as many less well known architectures
and numerous models within each family.
 ARM 7/9/11  Intel x86  PowerPC
 Cortex A5/A7/A9/A53  microMIPS  SPARC
 Cortex M3/M4/M7  MIPS  SuperH
 ColdFire  NIOS II  TileGX
eCosPro is currently available for over one hundred development and evaluation boards, as well as commercial
modules. These scale from efficient Cortex-M based boards, through FPGA based dual-core Cortex-A9 systems,
to massively parallel TileGX designs. Of particular note is the support for the Raspberry Pi range of boards,
which can provide an excellent low-cost base for evaluation, prototyping, deployment and educational purposes.
eCos’s open source nature confers many benefits. On the commercial side, the absence of any royalty or
product licensing fees make it particularly cost effective, especially in high volume designs. On the engineering
side, eCos puts the developer in control. The availability of all the source code provides the ultimate in flexibility,
aiding the debugging of complex application code, and enabling the customization and enhancement of the
system’s functionality as required.
Tel +44 1223 245571 www.ecoscentric.com
Fax +44 1223 248712 info@ecoscentric.com
Copyright © 2017 eCosCentric Limited. All rights reserved. eCosCentric, eCosPro and eCos are registered trademarks of eCosCentric Limited in the USA and United
Kingdom. RedBoot is a trademark of Red Hat Inc. in the USA. Linux is a registered trademark of Linus Torvalds. Windows is a registered trademark of Microsoft
Corporation in the USA and other countries. All other trademarks are the property of their respective owners. V16 March 2017.