Military drones
the ability of drones to combine surveillance and strike capabilities at a relatively low cost has
made them indispensable. Countries across Europe and beyond, including the EU, are closely
observing and learning from Ukraine's experience to refine their own strategies.
Definitions and types of drones
Unmanned aircraft, commonly known as drones, are described using various terms such as
unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs), remotely piloted aircraft systems (RPAS), and unmanned aircraft
systems (UAS). While these terms broadly describe the same concept, they highlight different
components. For example, an unmanned aircraft refers to any aircraft that operates without a pilot
on board, whereas an RPAS includes additional elements such as a remote pilot station and
command-and-control functions. A UAS, as a complete system, consists not only of the unmanned
aircraft itself but also a ground-based controller and a communication platform. Another category
within the drone family are the lethal autonomous weapons systems (LAWS), sometimes
controversially labelled as 'killer robots'. Although all the above are often grouped under the
umbrella term 'armed drones', a key distinction exists: armed drones allow human intervention while
LAWS operate entirely autonomously. While drones technically fit within the broader definition of
'robots', this term extends beyond unmanned aircraft to include a wide range of industrial
applications. Moreover, although drones are most commonly associated with aviation, they are also
used for land and maritime operations. Drones have both military and civilian uses (see Figure 1).
In military contexts, the term
Figure 1 – Most common drone uses
'drone' has traditionally been used
to refer to remotely controlled
aircraft used for gunnery practice.
However, the definition has
expanded significantly in recent
years to include a wide range of
devices, from inexpensive,
weaponised recreational
multicopters to sophisticated, jet-
sized uncrewed aircraft designed
for intelligence, surveillance and
reconnaissance (ISR), some of
which cost millions.
The rapid proliferation of drones
is particularly evident in the
conflict in Ukraine, where both
sides deploy thousands of drones
of various sizes and types daily.
While aerial drones (UAVs) are
the most common, maritime
Source: EPRS briefing, 2019. drones have made a significant
impact in the Black Sea, and land
drones (uncrewed ground vehicles – UGVs) are increasingly appearing on the battlefield. Drones
can be armed or unarmed, deployed for ISR or direct action, and either recoverable or designed
as one-way-attack (OWA) drones that self-destruct upon impact. Some drones are remotely
piloted using first-person view (FPV) goggles, while others are programmed as loitering munitions
to autonomously seek out pre-designated targets. A growing trend in drone warfare is the treatment
of certain OWA drones as expendable munitions, like artillery shells, while others function more like
cruise missiles. Additionally, new and niche applications are emerging, including drone-based mine
deployment, aerial combat through direct collision, and even UAVs equipped to breathe fire. The
evolving roles of drones in modern warfare underscore the increasing complexity of their use and
their expanding presence across various domains.
3