Military drones
within it include coordinated EU-European Investment Bank (EIB) funding for a flagship drone
technologies project, the creation of a strategic drone technology roadmap to guide research and
reduce dependencies, and the establishment of a civil-defence drone testing network to foster
collaboration across sectors. In addition, the EDIS notes that the Commission will put forward a
policy proposal to support the production of drones within the EU or possibly jointly with Ukraine
by mobilising relevant instruments.
Uncrewed systems across all domains, including the weaponisation of existing platforms, feature
prominently in the EU capability development plan (CDP), which was approved by EU defence
ministers in 2023. Notably, the CDP also advocates for the development of a European, NATO-
interoperable standard for air defence systems, encompassing both kinetic and directed energy
technologies designed to counter 'slow, small, and low-altitude threats' as well as drone swarms.
The ReArm Europe plan/Readiness 2030, launched by Commission President Ursula von der Leyen,
aims to bolster EU defence capabilities by leveraging over €800 billion in funding. EU Member States
are encouraged to increase national defence spending by activating the Stability and Growth Pact's
escape clause, allowing temporary fiscal flexibility for up to four years, limited to defence
expenditure and capped at 1.5 % of GDP annually. A new €150 billion instrument, SAFE (Security
Action for Europe), should provide long-term EU-backed loans to support rapid and large-scale
defence investments, mainly through joint procurement, with participation extended to Ukraine,
EFTA/EEA countries, and EU partners. The plan also leverages the EIB Group and introduces a new
savings and investments union strategy to attract private capital, ensuring the long-term viability of
the EU's defence industrial base.
The white paper for European defence – Readiness 2030 identifies drones and counter-drone
systems as one of seven priority areas critical for building robust EU defence. It emphasises that
collaborative procurement is the most efficient means to acquire large numbers of drones.
Additionally, the paper highlights Ukraine's significant expertise in drones and suggests that drones
should be provided to Ukraine
The Eurodrone
as a priority, as they are
Eurodrone is a collaborative European initiative designed to meet essential to address the
future unmanned aerial system (UAS) requirements. Developed as a asymmetry in military resources
joint effort between Leonardo, Airbus Defence and Space, and on the battlefield.
Dassault Aviation, the programme is a partnership between industry
At the special European Council
and government, supported by France, Germany, Spain, and Italy.
Under the management of the Organisation for Joint Armament Co- meeting on 6 March 2025, EU
operation (OCCAR), Eurodrone will be deployed globally for leaders reaffirmed their
intelligence, surveillance, target acquisition, and reconnaissance commitment to strengthening
(ISTAR) missions, both in wide-area and in-theatre operations. In defence capabilities and
2021, approximately €100 million was allocated to support the autonomy in response to
development of the Eurodrone, a long-endurance, remotely piloted
security threats, more
aircraft system. As part of its 2024 call for proposals, the Commission
specifically Russia's war against
allocated another €100 million to support the development of a fully
Ukraine. Recognising the
European medium-altitude, long-endurance (MALE) remotely
urgency of the situation, they
piloted aircraft system (RPAS). The aim is to reduce reliance on non-
welcomed the Commission's
EU manufacturers for ISR missions.
plan to recommend activating
The Eurodrone programme, launched in 2015, previously received
the Stability and Growth Pact's
€107 million in 2021 under the European defence industrial
escape clause to enable
development programme. However, the Eurodrone programme has
increased national defence
faced setbacks, including delays in a preliminary design review
originally scheduled for September 2023, due to coordination issues spending. Additionally, they
between Airbus and Dassault. These delays could impact the critical took note of the SAFE proposal
design review planned for September 2024 and may push back the for €150 billion in defence
drone's first flight, currently scheduled for January 2027. The loans. Leaders also backed
Eurodrone is also a PESCO project called 'European Medium Altitude expanding the EIB's role in
Long Endurance Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systems - MALE RPAS'.
defence financing and called for
5