UAVs and UCAVs: Developments in the European Union
1. Introduction
The purpose of this study is to provide a short overview of current developments in EU member
states in relation to Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAVs) and Unmanned Combat Aerial Vehicles
(UCAVs). Although UAVs have been deployed by several armed forces since the 1960s, they
have experienced a renaissance in the past 20 years. Interest in their acquisition has greatly
increased at the same time as the relevant technology has developed. Today UAVs are seen as
an integral and indispensable part of modern armed forces.
Most EU members have acquired UAVs or plan to do so soon. Several of them have used UAVs
in combat operations since the end of the Cold War, finding them especially useful in missions
against guerrilla forces and terrorists. In other words, just the type of adversaries European
forces are likely to encounter in the future when engaged in armed peacekeeping and limited
peace-enforcement missions.
More recently, UAVs have evolved from a reconnaissance system (a combat-supporting system)
to UCAVs, an actual combat system. The US has already used lightly-armed UAVs as UCAVs
in combat and several countries, including EU member states, are developing similar systems.
While UAV technology is mature, the development of real high-performance unmanned combat
aircraft – UCAVs – is a new and much more ambitious process. EU member states have already
taken their first steps in this process.
2. UAVs AND UCAVs
A UAV is an aircraft with no onboard pilot. Instead, it is remotely-controlled or can fly
autonomously based on pre-programmed flight plans or more complex dynamic ‘self-thinking’
systems. While to some extent such unmanned aircraft resemble cruise missiles1, they differ in
that they return to base for further use once they have fulfilled their mission.
2.1 Role of UAVs and UCAVs
The most common roles for UAVs involve combat support. These roles include:
• reconnaissance;
• radar, optical and/or electro-optical sensors;
• intelligence gathering;
• maritime patrol;
• search and rescue (SAR) support;
• survey and mapping;
• non-deadly combat role;
• electronic countermeasures and electronic warfare (mainly the suppression of enemy air
defences – SEAD);
• decoy;
• fire control/target designation (with laser designator);
1 Cruise missiles, like aircraft (and UAVs), derive their power to stay airborne from lift generated by their wings
and/or their body.
1