EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
UAVs have been around since the 1960s. However, since the mid-1980s a number of major
technical developments have made UAVs much more effective. As a result they have
proliferated tremendously.
Several EU countries have used UAVs for decades, although their operational use in combat
situations is limited. The EU has a small industrial capability to develop and produce most types
of advanced UAV systems, including actual UAV aircraft, its components, the control system
and the sensors. The only fields where the EU industry is not strongly engaged are micro UAVs
and large, very long-range UAVs (HALE).
EU members have been unsuccessful in exporting UAVs to non-EU members. Most UAVs in
service globally are US or Israeli products. The demand for UAVs is increasing, both in the EU
and globally. Much of the current EU demand is met by either by US UAV systems or by hybrid
Israeli-EU systems. With US systems, generally the complete UAV system is acquired. In the
case of the Israeli-EU systems, the UAV aircraft is acquired or licensed produced from Israel
and fitted with European sensors.
Globally UCAVs are currently limited to small numbers of lightly armed versions of ‘normal’
UAVs. None of these is at this moment in service in the EU. Development of UCAV technology
demonstrators is ongoing in the EU.
If EU members take part in ESDP missions it is not difficult to find enough UAVs for the
mission. But the more important question would be whether the UAVs would be able to provide
data quickly to the different national contingents that would comprise an ESDP mission.
While Europe has adopted policies for out-of-area missions, it is still unclear how far these
missions go beyond peacekeeping and limited peace-enforcing under UN mandates. While the
use of UAV in such operations is demonstrated, it leaves the usefulness of UCAVs in some
doubt.
The availability of long-range unmanned strike systems such as UCAVs may lead to a lowering
of the threshold for offensive operations that go beyond currently agreed EU policies. However,
as demonstrated in Iraq, Afghanistan and Kosovo, an easy victory on the battlefield achieved
with high-tech weaponry, does not solve the problem nor limits the necessity of large
deployments of vulnerable ground troops.
Since UAVs are generally rather simple systems, needing limited investments, there is room for
several producers in the EU.
UCAVs are exponentially more expensive and will, like other large systems such as combat
aircraft and air-defence missiles, need significant investments. Cooperating on production within
the EU seems unavoidable. However, current efforts within the EU are focused on the
development of working concepts. While greater coordination may seem useful, it could be that
having several independent projects is actually productive too by providing several initiatives
for devising an effective and credible working concept.
iii