6. Conclusion
For many countries, UAVs have become important force multipliers. They have gained a
permanent place in the military force structure, mainly for reconnaissance purposes: a role of
increasing importance. Not only is reconnaissance once more seen as a sine qua non for the type
of military operations most forces plan for today, but unmanned aircraft are starting to fulfill
other roles, including combat roles.
Most EU members have acquired UAVs or plan to do so soon. Several of them have used UAVs
in combat operations since the end of the Cold War, finding them especially useful in the type of
military operations envisaged in the ESDP. However, the acquisition of UAVs in the EU is
generally based on national decisions and often not very coordinated on the EU level. While it is
difficult to see if, in order to fulfill ESDP tasks, the EU needs additional UAVs on top of those
already in service or planned by EU members, the question of improved coordination in
acquisition and operation still arises.
If EU members take part in ESDP missions it is not difficult to find enough UAVs for the
mission. But the more important question would be whether the UAVs would be able to provide
data quickly to the different national contingents that would comprise an ESDP mission. In other
words, the quick dissemination of information may pose a problem, rather than the number of
UAVs available. It would be useful for the European EDA to make sure that a UAV ‘capability
gap’ is not developing through lack of means of communication.
The two places where one could see a capability gap is at the high and the extreme low end of
the UAV spectrum – in HALE and in the micro and mini UAVs. Although such systems have
been developed recently and are now widely deployed by US forces, EU forces have not yet
adopted them on a large scale. For HALE, Europe depends on US-controlled platforms.
However, since HALE UAVs would be most useful in large-scale operations against far-distant
enemies, it seems unlikely that the EU would need a fully independent HALE capability.
Mini/micro UAVs, on the other hand, have shown their value in combat operations and would
clearly boost the capabilities of EU forces engaged in ESDP missions.
The process of developing the much more complex high-tech UCAVs in Europe is partly
following the now ‘normal’ path of cooperation between a number of European countries. While
some coordination between the different EU UCAV programmes would be useful to save R&D
funds, it still remains unclear what the role of UCAVs would be, both at national level and in the
type of missions that form the core of ESDP focus. It would also still be useful to have several,
rather uncoordinated UCAV development efforts proceeding in parallel, since that would give
opportunities to develop alternative technologies.
15