International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)
Volume 135 – No.7, February 2016
Initiating Devices: This component acts as an input to the fire
alarm control unit and are either manually or automatically
actuated. Examples would be devices pull stations, heat
detectors, or gas detectors. Heat and gas detectors have
different categories of both kinds. Some categories are beam,
photoelectrical, aspiration, and duct.
Notification appliances: This component uses energy
supplied from the fire alarm system or other stored energy
source, to inform the proximate persons of the need to take
action, usually to evacuate. This is done by means of a
flashing light, strobe light, electromechanical horn, "beeper
horn", chime, bell, speaker, or a combination of these devices.
Building Safety Interfaces: This interface allows the fire
alarm system to control aspects of the built environment and
to prepare the building for fire, and to control the spread of
gas fumes and fire by influencing air movement, lighting,
process control, human transport and exit. [13]
Microcontrollers are designed for small or dedicated
Figure 2: A typical Fire Alarm System (Source: [1]).
applications. Microcontrollers are used in automatically
controlled products and devices, such as automobile engine 2.4 Review of Related Works
control systems, implantable medical devices, remote
[15] developed a system to counter the problems of gas
controls, office machines, appliances, power tools, and toys.
accidents in coal mines and family safety from gas usage
By reducing the size and cost compared to a design that uses a
through the use of a new infrared detection optics principle.
separate microprocessor, memory, and input/output devices,
The infrared optics gas detection was high in detection
microcontrollers make it economical to digitally control even
accuracy, long range service life. It the system allowed the
more devices and processes. Mixed signal microcontrollers
passage of infrared signal to the gas intended for measurement
are common, integrating analog components needed to control
while its molecules will absorb the light energy. The
non-digital electronic systems. [14]
absorption relationship followed Lamber-Beer law.
2.3 Embedded Design
In the year 2014, [12] stated that an efficient and smooth
A microcontroller can be considered a self-contained system working controller is needed to continuously sense both
with a processor, memory and peripherals and can be used leakage and level of the gas. And also fast response is
with an embedded system. (Only the software needs be required when leakage is found and the monitoring system
added). The majority of microcontrollers in use today are must provide additional leakage information which can be
embedded in other machinery, such as automobiles, used in further processing. The detection system includes
telephones, appliances, and peripherals for computer systems. Arduino duemilanove, microcontroller board compatible with
These are called embedded systems. While some embedded ATmega328p. coupled with the system is the weight sensor,
systems are very sophisticated, many have minimal LCD display, GSM and DC motor.
requirements for memory and program length, with no
[4] designed and implemented a GSM-Based Remote
operating system, and low software complexity. Typical input
Monitoring System. The paper focused on wireless
and output devices include switches, relays, solenoids, LEDs,
monitoring because the wireless remote monitoring system
small or custom LCD displays, radio frequency devices, and
has a wider application. The hardware and software
sensors for data such as temperature, humidity, light level etc.
architecture of the system was designed where the remote
[6] .Embedded systems usually have no keyboard, screen,
signal is transmitted through GSM network. The system has
disks, printers, or other recognizable I/O devices of a personal
two parts: the monitoring center and the remote monitoring
computer, and may lack human interaction device. [1] .The
station. The monitoring center consists of a computer and a
amount and type of detectors and the type of fire alarm system
TC35 communication module for GSM. The computer and
that one chooses for property protection will depend on the
the TC35 are connected by RS232. The remote monitoring
owner‟s property protection goals, the value of the property
station consist of a TC35 communication module for GSM,
and the requirements of the owner‟s insurance company.
an MSP430F149 MCU, a display unit, sensors and a data
Generally, heat detection will be used in all areas that are not gathering and processing unit. The software for the
considered high value. Here again, one of the most common monitoring center and the remote monitoring station were
mistakes in fire alarm system application is to provide partial designed using VB.
protection of a building and expect high performance from the
A review of gas leak detection techniques was done by [9]
installed systems of any kind . [5]
with a classification of leak detection methods in a gas
pipeline to monitor the integrity of a pipeline.
In terms of mode of operation, [12] settled for the use an
Arduino board, which is quite expensive and bulky. [10] used
microcontroller (PIC16F877), which in turn is a soft real time
system. It is said that “A hard real time system should always
respond to an event within the deadline or else the system
fails and endangers human lives but in soft real time system,
31