International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)
Volume 135 – No.7, February 2016
Dangerous Gas Detection using an Integrated Circuit
and MQ-9
Falohun A.S. Oke A.O. Abolaji B.M., Oladejo
Dept. of Computer Sc. & Eng. Dept. of Computer Sc. & Eng. O.E.
Ladoke Akintola Univ. of Tech. Ladoke Akintola Univ.of Tech. Dept. of Computer Sc. & Eng.
Ladoke Akintola Univ.of Tech.
ABSTRACT alarm systems. Dr. Guylène Proulx in [6] discussed three
reasons why occupants may ignore the alarm signal as:
Natural gas is an odourless one which consists of compounds
made of two elements: carbon and hydrogen called
 Failure to recognize the signal as a fire alarm.
hydrocarbons. Sometimes, due to an accident or if the valve is
 Loss of confidence in the system because of
not properly closed, the gas leaks. This system is aimed at
nuisance alarms, or,
detecting the leakage and sounding an alert so that occupants
in the building can maintain optimal ventilation and turn off  Failure to hear the signal if there is other source of
all electrical appliances or evacuate the vicinity until a redress
sound apart from the alarm system or the resident is
is made.
partly with deafness disability.
An MQ-9 chemical sensor coupled with an Integrated Circuit
Therefore, a gas detector with audible/visual alarm presented
was used to build the system and on testing, the system gave
herein tends to solve these identified problems through the
adequate visual information, audible and timely alert on
design and construction of a low-cost, easy to construct gas
detecting a gas leakage.
detection system via gas sensor. Figure 1 gave a hint on the
alarm system built around a Timer which is easy to work with,
General Terms
affordable and easy to design and construct, instead of a
Security, Safety, Signal, Gas, Casing.
Microcontroller.
Keywords
Sensor, Buzzer, Embedded, Soldering, Alarm. GAS AUDIO ALERT
TIMER
1. INTRODUCTION
SENSOR UNIT
In this fast developing society, electronics has come to stay as
the most important branch of Engineering. Electronic devices VISUAL ALERT
are being used in almost all industries for quality control and UNIT
automation and they are fast replacing the present vast army
Figure 1: Block diagram of the user-interactive fire alarm
of workers engaged in processing and assembling in the
system.
factories. These devices supplement the human ability to
sense, monitor, calculate, observe, and control. [8] 2. LITERATURE REVIEW
An uncontrolled combination of fuel with oxygen releases 2.1 Gas Alarm Systems
heat and any unintended contact with a spark can cause An automatic gas alarm system is designed to detect the
burning. Automatic gas detecting systems are intended to unwanted presence of fire by monitoring environmental
notify the building occupants to evacuate in the event of the changes associated with combustion. [2]
gas leakage or other emergency, report the event to an off-
premises location in order to summon emergency services, In general, a fire alarm system is classified as either
and to prepare the structure and associated systems to control automatically actuated, manually actuated, or both. [5].
the spread of gas and fire. [3] Automatic fire alarm systems are intended to notify the
building occupants to evacuate in the event of a fire or other
This work is about the design and construction of a gas emergency, report the event to an off-premises location in
detector with audible alarm. This gas detector with audible order to summon emergency services, and to prepare the
alarm is designed with the intention to ensure that the event of structure and associated systems to control the spread of fire.
gas is intelligently detected, promptly notified and
interactively managed than what is obtainable with 2.2 Parts of a Fire Alarm System
conventional ``ring-ring´´ fire alarm systems. Primary Power supply: Commonly the non-switched 120 or
240 Volt Alternating Current source supplied from a
„Jet Age‟ is what the age is called as the growing desire of
commercial power utility. In non-residential applications, a
human, is that things are done in the twinkle of an eye (i.e.
branch circuit is dedicated to the fire alarm system and its
food get cooked in a minute, uninterrupted power supply, fast
constituents. "Dedicated branch circuits" should not be
transportation of people and loads, fast access to knowledge
confused with "Individual branch circuits" which supply
base (Internet), Internet banking, social media
energy to a single appliance.
communication, online classes). And these have led to breath-
taking inventions to cater for these desires. One of such is the
Secondary (backup) Power supplies: This component,
gas-cooker, whose work is of great benefit. It is observed that
commonly consisting of sealed lead-acid storage batteries or
the destruction caused by fire due to gas leakage is quite
other emergency sources including generators, is used to
alarming and building occupants are slow in responding to
supply energy in the event of a primary power failure.
30