International Journal of Computer Applications (0975 – 8887)
Volume 135 – No.7, February 2016
failing to meet the deadline produces false output and does 3.2 Principle of operation
endanger the human lives.” The gas detector alarm system is designed with the intention
3. DESIGN ANALYSIS
to ensure that the event of gas is intelligently detected,
promptly notified and interactively managed. It is built around
3.1 Circuit Diagram
a timer to accept input from the gas sensor, MQ-9, and
The schematic diagram in Figures 3a and 3b diagrammatically activate a buzzer and set of led that alerts in the event of gas.
depicts the gas detection system (i.e. from the power stage, The sensor used is the MQ-9 and from the datasheet, it
detection and alarm stage). specializes in gas detection equipment for carbon monoxide
The amount of supplied power into the circuit is dependent on and CH, LPG family and any other relevant industry or car
4
the combined power usage on each component in the circuit. assemblage.
From the right-most part of Figure 3 is written 12V, 300mA
i.e. the calculated average power that was sufficient to power 3.3 Sensor
the whole circuit. And this power was generated from an AC- For detecting the event of gas which is associated with fire is
DC adapter which can step down, rectify and stabilize monitored using a gas sensor.
outputs.
It advantage is that it has;
The adapter gets connected to the circuit board via a polarized
 Good sensitivity to CO/Combustible gas
adapter jack port which is not fixed on the board but screwed
to the casing that houses the whole circuit. From the supplied  High sensitivity to Methane, Propane and CO
12V, 300mA, is connected the U1, 78L05 a three (3) pin
voltage regulator which is supplied with any DC < 35V and  Long life and low cost
will always give the DC output of 5V.
 Simple drive circuit
This DC output of 5V is where other components tap from.
The enveloped MQ-9 has 6 pins, 4 of which are used to
First, is the gas sensor (MQ-9), then the 555Timer, and most
fetch signals, and other 2 for providing heating current. The
importantly, the alarm systems (the four (4) red led and
sensor works with voltages between 5V and 12V AC or DC.
buzzer) and other components as the resistors and capacitors.
A 5V supply voltage was used for this design. Once powered,
the output of the sensor is normally HIGH but goes LOW
when gas is sensed.
Figure 3a: Circuit diagram for the gas detector with
audible alarm system with ISIS Professional
Figure 3c:The MQ-9 gas sensor.
4. IMPLEMENTATION AND TESTING
4.1 Construction
The physical realization of the project is very vital. This is
where the fantasy of the whole idea meets reality. Here the
paper work is transformed into a finished hardware.
Notables on the Design;
1. Set of pore holes for proper ventilation and proper
communication between the circuit and the external
environment.
2. When the circuit is ON, a green led comes ON, and
red when gas is sensed.
3. A protruded sensor for proper contact in detecting
Figure 3b: Close Circuit diagram for the gas detector with
gas.
audible alarm system.
4. The packaged container fit the size of the circuit
32