UNCLASSIFIED
Strategic Focus Areas
Goal: Coordinate Open Source Data Acquisition and Expand Data Sharing
Coordinate the acquisition of open source data to avoid redundancy and expand data sharing,
as appropriate, to enable mission and ensure the most efficient use of IC resources.
All members of the IC should be able to discover IC-acquired open source data and
community OSINT reporting, while adhering to security and classification requirements.
Expanding the accessibility of Publicly Available Information (PAI) and Commercially Available
Information (CAI) will maximize the return on IC investment and increase the value of open
source data and tools across all IC missions.
To ensure the most efficient acquisition models and broadest possible sharing of data across
the community, OSINT leaders will partner with IC Data Officers and others to coordinate the
distributed acquisition of PAI and CAI, with consideration for its ethical and appropriate use,
consistent with law and policy. These processes will consider the value and necessity of the
data for IC mission uses, as well as the equities of multi-mission departments and agencies
when acquiring data for both intelligence and non-intelligence purposes. The IC will regularly
review usage metrics and mission impact for all data purchases to ensure the best use of IC
resources.
In accordance with the Director of National Intelligence’s (DNI) direction, the IC will implement
the CAI Framework and track PAI and CAI in a centralized, multi-domain data catalog to
enhance transparency. The OSINT community will leverage ongoing efforts to enhance data
management across the IC through the development of interoperability and data tagging
standards to ensure data reaches mission users in a timely and usable manner. In addition,
the IC will establish common OSINT platforms to facilitate access to shared data and tools,
and we will identify and implement a pathway to deliver IC OSINT products to the broader U.S.
Government.
Goal: Establish Integrated Open Source Collection Management
Align and manage open source collection efforts across the IC to enhance the speed and
awareness of collection while avoiding duplication of effort.
Integrated collection management is a foundational necessity to ensure that the IC’s open
source collection efforts are optimized to meet varied and evolving national security and IC
mission requirements. The OSINT enterprise must develop agile processes and workflows to
coordinate collection activities across the IC, make adjustments as needed, and ensure
compliance with privacy and civil liberties protections. These processes and workflows must be
grounded in a common baseline of open source collection activities that includes a gap
analysis against priority collection requirements and the identification of IC elements best
postured to address critical gaps.
3
UNCLASSIFIED