UNCLASSIFIED
Introduction
OSINT is vital to the Intelligence Community’s Mission. OSINT both enables other
intelligence collection disciplines and delivers unique intelligence value of its own, allowing the
IC to more efficiently and effectively leverage its exquisite collection capabilities. As the open
source environment continues to expand and evolve at breakneck speed, the ability to extract
actionable insights from vast amounts of open source data will only increase in importance.
Rapid advances in artificial intelligence and machine learning present significant
opportunities to capitalize on the value of OSINT. At the same time, the IC must be attuned to
the risks in the open source domain, including the provenance and validity of information it
obtains. To maintain an intelligence advantage in the open source environment, we must
embrace new technologies and tradecraft to collect and evaluate open source data. At the
same time, the IC must reimagine its relationships with industry and academia to leverage
cutting-edge capabilities being developed and applied in the private sector. Because of the
unclassified nature of open source information, OSINT presents a unique opportunity among
collection disciplines to explore new partnership models to speed the adoption of new tools
and tradecraft.
For the IC to surpass nation-state competitors that are making significant investments in
the open source domain, we must build an integrated and agile OSINT community that can
rapidly innovate as the open source environment evolves. The IC OSINT Strategy provides the
framework for integrating OSINT more fully into IC workflows, tradecraft, and all-source
analysis, while ensuring appropriate protections for privacy and civil liberties. To advance the
OSINT discipline, the IC will streamline data acquisition, develop innovative technologies to
collect and derive insight from open source data, strengthen the coordination of open source
collection activities across the community, update and standardize OSINT tradecraft, and
develop a highly skilled OSINT workforce. Through these efforts, we will work together to
leverage the full power of OSINT to support IC analysts and operators and ensure the IC is
poised to provide decision advantage for warfighters and national security policymakers.
2
UNCLASSIFIED