Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment
Figure 6. High-level analysis of representations in the real-world infra-red (IR) and electro-
optical/visual (EO) Dataset.
From the above, we find the dataset demonstrates a strong bias toward scenes involving small
drones, particularly in the visual data segment. This overrepresentation leads to uneven coverage
of other operationally relevant targets especially for defense use cases, where the system’s
performance against medium-range threats such as loitering munitions and Class 2 attack UAVs may be
relevant. The resulting imbalance may introduce dataset-driven inductive biases, potentially causing
learned models to overfit to high-contrast or uncluttered settings, while underperforming in more
complex real-world environments.
Figure 7. Distribution of dataset representation in light condition (left) and drone quantity (right)
in the electro-optical visual dataset.
Furthermore, within the data from electro-optical sensors (Figure 7), low-light (‘dark’) scenarios are
notably underrepresented in the data and when present, are predominantly paired with small drones.
The visual segment is overwhelmingly dominated by bright scenes, with bright images appearing across
nearly all size and background categories. In contrast, dark scenes are both fewer in number and
narrowly distributed, mostly involving small drones. Combinations involving medium-sized drones under
dark lighting conditions are extremely sparse. This imbalance limits the evaluation of system robustness
across illumination domains and may compromise performance generalization to real-world conditions
that involve variable or degraded lighting, limiting the dataset’s ability to support evaluation of
performance under low-light conditions. This would negatively impact confidence in the deployed CV
system in the operational scenario discussed above if not addressed, as it opens operators up to unexpected
risks that their CV system may malfunction and fail
1A.03 - 24 STO-MP-IST-210