Integration of a Commercial
Unmanned Vehicle into the Army Communications System
Generallyspeaking,thesolutionistogenerateandsendthe
XML files containing the UGV’s position to the BMS, this
was executed using Script 2 and can be achieved using Wi-
Fi, Military Radios or other IP-based radio communication
technologies.
The Wi-Fi tests were divided into two scenarios: one using
existing network infrastructure and the other using the RAD-
MAVLink-Bridge architecture, which transforms the Rasp-
berry Pi into a wireless access point. The military radio tests
weredividedintotwoscenarios:oneexclusivelyusingP/PRC-
525 Tactical Radios and the other using TR5000H radios.
The computer representing the GCS has Windows 11, a
Ryzen 7 3700U processor, and 16 GBytes of RAM.
The computer representing the BMS is the Getac used by
the Portuguese Army, which has Windows 10 Pro, an Intel
Core i5-6300U processor, and 8 GBytes of RAM.
Fig.11:NetworkArchitecture—P/PRC-525.
A. Scenario 1: Wi-Fi
The choice of this scenario with the P/PRC-525 is because
All the data was sent via Wi-Fi in the Wi-Fi tests shown
these are the radios of most significant use in the Portuguese
in Figure 10. The only requirement is that the GCS and the
Army. This scenario can be transported to a situation where
Raspberry Pi be on the same network. The Wi-Fi protocol
there are two manned tactical vehicles, a UGV and a vehicle
used in the Wi-Fi tests was Wi-Fi 4 (802.11n) at a frequency
that symbolises the command vehicle (GCS).
of 2.4 GHz.
Given the size of LAFVIN’s UGV, this configuration only
makes sense in a static situation. In a dynamic situation, data
from the UGV to the GCS would only be sent via Wi-Fi.
D. Scenario 4: Military Radios — TR5000H
In the configuration with TR5000H Tactical Radio, VHF
(225-228MHz)radiocommunicationinIPoAwithcontinuous
phase modulation in balanced mode. It was used to send
the HEARTBEAT and GPS RAW INT messages from the
Raspberry Pi to the GCS and the XML with the UGV
Fig.10:NetworkArchitecture—Wi-Fi.
position to the BMS; it is similar to the network architecture
representedinFigure11.Alltheotherdata(controlcommands
The BMS could be running on GCS by sending the XML,
and video) was sent via Wi-Fi, like in Figure 10.
by TCP, to localhost. In either case, Script 2 is required.
This architecture was chosen because the TR5000 is the
radio most recently acquired by the Portuguese Army.
B. Scenario 2: Wi-Fi-RAD-MAVLink-Bridge
The RAD-MAVLink-Bridge script turns the Raspberry Pi E. Solution Evaluation
into a wireless access point. A Wi-Fi network (rad-bridge)
Thenetworkperformanceresultsweredeterminedusingthe
connects the GCS to this network and sends the necessary
iPerf3softwareinaconfigurationwheretheRaspberryPiwas
commands. The Wi-Fi protocol used in the Wi-Fi-RAD-
the server (sender), and the GCS was the client (receiver). In
MAVLink-Bridge tests was Wi-Fi 4 (802.11n) at a frequency
the case of Wi-Fi tests, the iPerf3 commands were executed
of2.4GHz.ThearchitectureissimilartotheoneinFigure10,
in a scenario where communication was fully established,
butconsideringthatthenetworkisgeneratedontheRaspberry
representing an additional throughput consumption already
Pi.
existing by the UGV C2. The tests with military radios
The BMS could be running on GCS by sending the XML,
were carried out in two scenarios: one with no data to be
by TCP, to localhost. In either case, Script 2 is required.
transmitted on the communication channel and the other with
HEARTBEAT, GPS RAW INT, and XML messages to be
C. Scenario 3: Military Radios — P/PRC-525 sent.
In the configuration with P/PRC-525 Tactical Radio, VHF EachiPerftestwasconductedforapproximately60seconds,
(SECOM-V102-104MHz)radiocommunicationinIPoAwas covering the following scenarios:
usedtosendtheHEARTBEATandGPS RAW INTmessages 1) Measurement of throughput using TCP;
fromtheRaspberryPitotheGCSandtheXMLwiththeUGV 2) Bidirectional TCP bandwidth testing;
position to the BMS; it is represented in Figure 11. All the 3) UDP testing for jitter and data loss analysis.
other data (control commands and video) was sent via Wi-Fi, In the case of the tests with military radios, UDP and TCP
as in Figure 10. tests were performed simultaneously.
STO-MP-IST-209 1760 - 8