Integration of a Commercial
Unmanned Vehicle into the Army Communications System
the send_position(latitude, longitude,
altitude) function. This function sends MAVLink
GPS RAW INT messages with latitude, longitude, and
altitude data to the Mission Planner.
4) Control commands: The MAVLink MAN-
UAL CONTROL messages are received by the Raspberry
Pi using the handle _manual_control function.
Depending on the parameters received, the corresponding
message is sent to the Arduino to operate the UGV:
• Front: send_command_to_arduino(%F#);
• Back: send_command_to_arduino(%B#);
• Right: send_command_to_arduino(%R#);
• Left: send_command_to_arduino(%L#).
To send control commands to the UGV, the Gembird
Gamepad was first connected to the GCS and then paired
with the Mission Planner. When connected to the Mission
Planner, two axes of movement were used, allowing the
UGV to move in four different directions. The axes were
chosen automatically by the Mission Planner, considering the
movement of the controller’s analog, selected by the user.
For movements in different directions on the same axis, the
Fig.9:Script2—ManagementofthelinkbetweenGCSandBMS.
“Reverse” option was used. The mode chosen was “Manual
Control”, which will be important in the type of MAVLink
6) Mission Planner Configuration: This subsection
messages generated at the GCS.
presents the main aspects to be configured in the Mission
Planner, namely, receiving the video and sending the control
5) Script 2 — Management of the link between GCS and
commands. The Mission Planner is configured on port
BMS: Script 2, shown in Figure 9, runs on the GCS and
14551. Once the software is open, after running Script 1 and
represents a link to the BMS. It creates an XML, and it is
then starting GCS with MAVProxy, a UDP connection is
senttotheBMS.ThisscriptaimstoextracttheUGVposition
automatically started on port 14551.
from MAVLink messages and generate an XML according to
First, the configuration of video reception on the Mission
STANAG5527.Theconnectionisestablishedwithport14552,
Planner and its capture and sending on the Raspberry Pi is
whereMAVLinkmessagesareforwardedviaMAVProxy.This
presented using the Raspivid and GStreamer libraries, respec-
script can run on GCS if MAVProxy is forwarding messages
tively. Then, in this section, the configuration of the joystick
to port 14552 on localhost or on another machine.
in Mission Planner and the configurations to send control
commands are presented.
The used XML model is the A2 of the STANAG 5527.
7) Video streaming: Image capture was first initiated using
Depending on where the BMS is running, the XML must be
the Raspivid application on the Raspberry Pi. Then, the
sent there. In a configuration where the BMS is running on
GStreamer application was used to send the video stream to
the GCS, it is enough to send it to localhost; otherwise, it
the Mission Planner, running on the GCS.
requires the IP of a machine on the network that is running
The quality of image capture has an influence on the band-
the BMS. In the tactical radio scenario, this sending is done
width required for communication. The quality of the image
via military radios. The IP to which the XML is sent must be
is adjusted according to the characteristics of the transmission
configured in the function send_xml_file(filename,
channel, which will be analysed in the results.
server_ip, server_port) used to send the file.
IntheBMS,inadditiontothestandardconfiguration,which
IV. RESULTS
includes creating a mission with some mandatory parameters, The solutions for the tests in the SIC-T project team will
suchastheconfigurationofthestackandGPS,agatewaymust bepresented.Toachievethis,testswerecarriedoutusingWi-
be configured in the BMS with the port where the report will Fi technology alone and a hybrid configuration using tactical
bereceived,inthiscase,port48882,andthemessagetemplate radios and Wi-Fi. The tactical radios fill an existing gap in
which will be used, in this case, FFT Systems—STANAG Wi-Fi communication — security — since the UGV position
5527 A1/A2. is considered critical data.
STO-MP-IST-209 1760 - 7