Integration of a Commercial Unmanned Vehicle
into the Army Communications System
Joa˜o Pedro Arau´jo Silva Anto´nio Manuel Cordeiro Grilo Artur Jorge Coutinho Machado
Academia Militar Instituto Superior Te´cnico Exe´rcito Portugueˆs
silva.jpa3@exercito.pt antonio.grilo@inov.pt machado.ajsc@exercito.pt
Abstract—This study explores the integration of commercial Systems through Project EXE02 - Remote and Autonomous
Unmanned Vehicles (UxVs) in military operations, focusing on Systems. This study is aligned with this work package, which
enhancing communication between these vehicles and their con-
aims to develop a communication subsystem to be applied in
trol centres. Global conflicts, particularly the Ukraine war, have
UGVs. This capability will help military command decisions
accelerated the development of autonomous military systems.
The Portuguese Army is investing in these technologies to lower and reduce human exposure to threats.
costsandspeeduptheacquisition,development,andintegration
of these capabilities. These platforms have improved decision-
A. Objectives
making and operational efficiency and can be applied in the
Portuguese Army and the other branches of the Armed Forces The main objective of this project is to design an architec-
(AF). This study contributes by developing an MAVLink library ture and develop software for the integration of commercial
forUxVcommunication,hybridtoolsfordatatransmissionusing
UGVsintotheSIC-T.Theprimarypurposeofcommunications
militaryradios,WirelessFidelity(Wi-Fi),andunmannedvehicle
in UGVs is to guarantee reliable, real-time data transmission.
navigation without dedicated autopilot hardware.
ThesolutiondevelopedwasimplementedusingLAFVINUGV, This allows the operator to receive information from the
and the tests were carried out with the support of the Tactical vehicle,suchassensordata,images,andvideo,andsendcon-
Information and Communications System (SIC-T) project team. trol commands to remotely guide the UGV. Communication
After obtaining the results, it was possible to draw important
protocols are crucial in establishing a reliable and efficient
valuesandconclusionsregardingusingmilitaryradios—P/PRC-
connection between an UGV and the control centre [4].
525 and TR5000H — for integrating a UGV into the Battlefield
Management System (BMS). Within this main objective, this study has the following
secondary objectives:
Index Terms—UGV, BMS, MAVLink, Military Radios, Wi-Fi.
• To support piloting of a commercial UGV, without the
needforspecificautopilothardwaresuchasPixhawkline
I. INTRODUCTION or Ardupilot Mega;
HUMAN life is priceless, and the loss of life can be • DevelopmentofalibrarythatconnectsaUxVtotheSIC-
T;
reduced considerably with the use of robots and au-
tonomous systems in the armed forces. Today, almost all • Testing and evaluation of the developed solution.
military organisations use robots to perform dangerous tasks
in high-risk environments [1].
II. BACKGROUNDANDRELATEDWORK
A UxV is a vehicle that operates without a human on- The UGVs can navigate in spaces that would be dangerous
board, either remotely controlled or autonomously. There are or inaccessible to humans and can operate in increasingly
several types of UxVs: Unmanned Ground Vehicle (UGV), complex environments through intelligence and efficiency. By
Unmanned Aerial Vehicle (UAV), and Unmanned Maritime equipping a UGV with a camera or other sensors, operators
Vehicle (UMV) [2]. Communications in a UxV are essential can quickly analyse objects and regions of interest with
to enable remote control and data transmission between the precision[5].Spaceexploration,particularlyontheMoonand
vehicle and the operator [1]. Mars,isamongthemostimportant.Inrecentyears,NASAhas
In recent years, in the face of increasing military tensions developedfiveUGVplatforms:Sojourner(1997),Opportunity
at a global level, especially with the start of the conflict (2004), Spirit (2004), Curiosity (2012), and Perseverance
in Ukraine on 24 February 2022, there has been a notable (2021). In parallel, the China National Space Administration
rush towards military technology. The purpose of this cam- has also developed an UGV, the Zhurong (2021) [6].
paignwastoimprovedefencecapabilities.TheNorthAtlantic AsformilitaryUGVs,theyhavealonglineage,descending
Treaty Organization (NATO) identified Autonomous Systems fromtheTeletankofRussianoriginandtheGoliathofGerman
and Communications as technologies that will play a highly origin, both used in the Second World War. UGVs, as we
disruptiveroleoverthenexttwodecades,playingacrucialrole know them today, emerged in the second half of the 20th
in improving human performance and promoting symbiosis century, around 1970, with the flourishing of microprocessor
between man and machine [3]. technology. Many developments in robotics originated from
The Portuguese Army, through the 2023 Military Program- research and development projects by the Department of De-
ming Law, is making a significant investment in Autonomous fense (DoD) of the United States of America (USA). Despite
STO-MP-IST-209 1760 - 1