Integration of a Commercial
Unmanned Vehicle into the Army Communications System
The use of a military radio in the UGV is only for commu- 2) Script 1 — Management of the link between Raspberry
nication with CNR and depends on the weight and volume Pi,Arduino,andGCS: Script1,showninFigure8,represents
of the radio, taking into account the payload capacity of the a link between the UGV and the ground station used to send
UGV. The G-Mouse GPS VK-162 with a USB connection theUGVpositiontotheGCS.Italsoisusedtosendcommand
to the Raspberry Pi was adopted. The hardware used in the controls to the UGV. This script runs on the Raspberry Pi.
LAFVIN UGV for Wi-Fi communication is represented by In the case of communication using military radios, it is
Figure 7. necessary to initiate two connections to MAVProxy, one for
the radios and the other for Wi-Fi, since both are used.
TheRaspberryPi↔Arduinoconnectionisusedtosendthe
controlcommandstotheArduino.Allcommandsbetweenthe
GCSandtheRaspberryPiaresentviaWi-Fiintheconfigura-
tionusingWi-Fi.Inthecaseoftheconfigurationusingtactical
radios,theheartbeatsaresentbybothcommunicationchannels
sothattheavailabilityofbothcanbeseen.TheUGVposition,
throughthesend position(latitude, longitude,
altitude) function, is only sent using tactical radios.
This is the most critical communication component since it
displays the UGV position. By using military radios, it is
possible to exploit the encryption they offer and thus make
communication more secure.
Fig.7:HardwareinLAFVINUGVforWi-Ficommunication.
The GCS consists of the following components:
• Computer;
• Gembird Gamepad;
• Radio.
As with the UGV, military radios are used in the GCS only
for communication with CNR. It is important to note that
in this study, the camera used for transmission is from the
samemanufacturerastheonboardunit.Thismakesiteasierto
integratethecamerawiththeonboardunit;itisonlynecessary
to configure the camera in the settings without the need for
specific software.
D. Software Modules
Inthissection,threesoftwarescriptsweredeveloped,which
will be described in the corresponding subsections. The soft-
ware developed was also integrated with the GCS software.
The delay block in sending heartbeat logic allows the
control of the frequency of sending HEARTBEAT messages.
The delay block, in send position logic, present in both
scripts allows adjusting the frequency of position messages,
GPS RAW INT in the case of Figure 8, and XML messages
totheBMSwiththeidentificationoftheUGVanditsposition,
in the case of Figure 9. This frequency adjustment makes
it possible to communicate in scenarios with less bandwidth
available.
1) Script 0 — Arduino: The LAFVIN UGV manufac-
turer code, represented by Script 0 in the general archi- Fig.8:Script1—ManagementofthelinkbetweenRaspberryPi,
tecture, had to be adapted as communication is now via a Arduino,andGCS.
serial cable, and the manufacturer did not plan this mode
of communication; it runs on the Arduino. In Arduino, 3) GPS: To get the UGV position, the “gpsd”, “gpsd-
the function processRaspberryPiCommand(String clients”, and “python-gps” libraries were used to obtain the
command) allows commands to be received via a serial GPS data using the get_gps_data() function. These li-
connection to the Raspberry Pi. The manufacturer code did braries had to be installed on Raspberry Pi. The initial step
not include this communication mode. To avoid problems, all was to start the session, and then the latitude, longitude and
the other communication modes — Infrared and Bluetooth — altitude variables were updated in real-time.
were deactivated. Once it had the variables to update, it created
STO-MP-IST-209 1760 - 6