Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment
Table 12. Relative results across different combinations of drone size and drone quantity factors
across visual dataset.
4.1.3.3 Impact of image noise on performance
In measuring the impact of image noise on performance, we first discounted the IR dataset as its overall
performance was way too low to obtain meaningful results from analyzing the sub-dataset differences in
noise profile. For the EO dataset, we assigned each ground-truth object a noise score based on high-
frequency variance: variance(patch - GaussianBlur(patch)). This quantifies texture and graininess in the
object region. Based on this score, objects are classified into the following categories:
Low: Variance < 100.0 – smooth, low-noise regions.
Medium: 100.0 ≤ Variance < 400.0 – moderate noise or texture.
High: Variance ≥ 400.0 – strong texture or high noise presence.
We then assess the standard detection metrics (Recall, Precision, F1, Mean IoU), along with the number of
Low, Medium, and High noise objects per class. Classes are ranked by the number of ground-truth objects
(NumGT), limited to the top-k if specified. For each chart, we compare performance between low-
noise/medium-noise/base-noise objects and their non-low counterparts. Metrics were computed using the
same set of predictions. It is clear that there is significant drop-off in performance when the level of noise in
an image increases, to the extent that in this case high noise completely leads to null scores across all
metrics.
Figure 9. Missed Detection Rate and False Alarm Rate Results for EO dataset (without IoU
threshold).
4.1.3.4 Validation of framework and understanding follow-ups for defense and security users
We see from the above analysis that significant performance differences can exist, and be discovered, within
different segments of the data for an open-source, general foundation model. It is important to note that a CV
system developer is likely to further fine-tune such foundation models with domain-specific datasets to
overcome performance issues on each of these various edge cases. However, such fine-tuning efforts come at
a cost and are likely to lead to trade-offs in other segments of performance, for which visibility is important
for defense and security teams evaluating their performance, and determining if these trade-offs would be
acceptable given certain mission parameters and requirements. In the case of the drastic performance gap in
STO-MP-IST-210 1A.03 - 29