Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment
Table 10. Relative results across different combinations of background/light factors across
visual dataset.
Going deeper into exploring the best performing sky-bright test cases in Table 10, we see that there is a
significant drop-off in performance across smaller object sizes that reinforces the overall initial analysis that
the model does not perform well in situations with drones that present as a small (i.e. < 32 x 32 pixels) target,
either due to it being a small drone or far away from the sensor. Although range was not one of the initial
considerations when scoping this series of test cases, we find further support for the hypothesis that this
system does not perform well on small objects and may need to further investigate the effects on performance
by varying drone distance from the sensor, perhaps through live testing to understand the limits of detection.
Table 11. Performance by object size, within the sky-bright pairwise scenarios.
4.1.3.2 Performance differences between test cases of different object size-quantity combinations
On the second pairwise combination of drone size and quantity, we find that the best performance was
observed in the test cases with single, small drones with mAP at 0.25, at a very high confidence (confidence
interval > 0.99). We also find that the worst performance was on single medium drones at 0.01 mAP, with a
confidence interval of >0.94, while multiple small drones are not far off at an mAP of 0.03. This lends
weight to our initial concerns of models not being optimized for medium, and multiple drones, as these
foundational models lack training data for these features and typically do not account for multiple drones in
an image, due to the majority of their training data corpus involving single-target, close-up images. We also
observe an interesting trend across all three cases, where measured recall is consistently higher than
precision. For the best-performing scenarios with single small drones, recall was at 0.4 (leading to a Missed
Detection Rate of 60%) while precision was at 0.19, (leading to a False Alarm Rate of 81%). While this
means that missed detections are less likely than false alarms, it would also suggest that the directionality of
current model hyperparameters lead to a trade-off in favor of recall at the cost of precision. As noted earlier,
any further fine-tuning would lead to real trade-offs in one or more performance dimensions; the counter-
drone CV system evaluators in our hypothetical scenario would need to note these trends before and after
fine-tuning and design the necessary engineering and operational workarounds that would account for these
trade-offs while preserving their benefits. In the case of a system with a high number of false alarms, and a
relatively lower missed detection rate, options to consider include further heuristic-based suppression
mechanisms could be employed to reduce ‘alarm fatigue’ for human operators, or dedicated operational roles
implemented to investigate and suppress false alarms while escalating genuine alarms.
1A.03 - 28 STO-MP-IST-210