Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment
operationally-relevant metrics, translation into technical standards and metrics, testing on sparse internal
datasets, live open-world testing where applicable, and the creation of customized reports in alignment with
the expectations of various stakeholders’ from governance, technical, compliance, procurement and strategic
teams.
Second, their restrictive nature means they often lack the transparency and independent scrutiny found in
public benchmarks, potentially leading to biased or incomplete assessments. The results from these
evaluations are typically not publicly shared, making it difficult for the broader community to learn from
successes and failures, nor critique the methodology. Even in the rare cases that these evaluation results may
be shared, such as between allied nations’ militaries, the lack of uniformity in evaluation standards limit the
ability of partner militaries to accept and understand their counterparts’ evaluations in relation to their unique
context and data.
2.3 Relevance to Symposium Topics and NATO Allied Military Systems
The approach we propose relates directly to the IST-210 Symposium’s topics of “AI assurance frameworks,
standards, terminology and metrics”, and “AI risk and vulnerability assessment, including mitigation” by
proposing a framework to ensure the reliability and trustworthiness of CV models, thereby mitigating
significant AI risks and vulnerabilities in critical military applications. Recent efforts such as CEN-
CENELEC’s CWA 18150 CEN Workshop Agreement on “Unmanned aircraft systems - Counter UAS-
Testing methodology”, published in Oct 2024, have further established some common scenarios and
standards relevant to counter-UAS operations undertaken by defense and security agencies [3]. We attempt
to expand on them further by describing the approach to test, measure, and verify counter-UAS CV software
against these scenarios and standards. Our approach directly contributes to the development of a common
lexicon and AI assurance framework by outlining criteria for creating robust internal reference datasets,
quantifying their properties (including approaches to qualify hard-to-detect targets), and introducing
comprehensive pre-deployment testing checklists. While the test data can remain classified to each
organization, the framework, toolkits, and pre-deployment testing checklists can be shared across each
organization and establish a common basis for communicating the performance of counter-drone CV
systems of interest across allied members. We will demonstrate how highly contextualized, use-case-specific
internal benchmarks can be developed to compare models in a standardized manner, providing essential
metrics for performance evaluation. Through this work, we aim to simplify and scale automated testing,
identify weak performance spots, and provide decision-makers with clear go/no-go criteria for deploying CV
models. The desired outcome is to bridge the testing gap and foster trust in these critical technologies,
directly supporting the development and management of NATO Allied Military Systems in the crucial
domain of counter-drone solutions throughout their life cycle. It will also enhance interoperability, and
facilitate information-sharing, through providing a common frame of reference across like-minded defense
agencies evaluating perception software used in counter-drone solutions.
3.0 DESCRIPTION
3.1 Outline of Proposed Approach
Given these challenges, we propose a novel approach that aims to combine the best aspects of both public
benchmarks and organization/project-centric evaluations while minimizing the limitations of each. Our
objective is to create a common comprehensive, trustworthy, and adaptable framework for assessing CV in
counter-drone systems, providing a common baseline for comparing commercial solutions. This framework
would come with a set of toolkits to evaluate data and models along specific dimensions, generate data to
augment test data, and also allow users like NATO allied militaries to keep their classified datasets within
their systems and protect their data, but also allow sharing of their scenario characteristics, synthetic data, or
discoveries about theirs or vendors’ model behaviors to selective partners under broad information-sharing
1A.03 - 10 STO-MP-IST-210