Integration of a Commercial
Unmanned Vehicle into the Army Communications System
sories. This means more options for everyone involved, from specifically the Joint Architecture for Unmanned Systems and
autonomoussystemsmakerstopeopleusingthem,anditstops its interoperability profile. The experiments involved multiple
any company from dominating the market [20]. MAVLink is NATO countries using different UGVs and GCS, demonstrat-
aboutimprovinghowUxVsworktogether,sparkingnewideas, ing that systems could be easily extended to comply with
and helping the industry grow [20]. these standards. No experiments were carried out with UAVs
SinceUAVsnavigatethroughthree-dimensionalspace,they in this experiment due to technical problems. However, the
present a broad scenario for communicating position and integration of UAVs that used the MAVLink communication
velocity data. Consequently, it makes sense to utilise the protocol was studied [26].
same protocol for other vehicles, like UGVs moving in two- The report by the Estonian Defence Investment Centre [27]
dimensional space or UMVs, which operate in three dimen- analyses eleven platforms from different companies/consortia
sions but beneath the ocean’s surface [20]. from various countries. The report concludes that, in general,
all the UGVs were able to drive in an open field with
E. BMS waypointsbasedonsatellitenavigationsystems;thesamewas
nottrueinrougherscenariosorwithvegetation.Table1shows
The BMS integrates the Army Command and Control
the companies/consortium, platform and country of origin.
Information System (Sistema de Informaca˜o para o Comando
e Controlo do Exe´rcito) (SICCE) of the SIC-T, which in turn
supportstheCommandandControl(C2).TheBMSworksvia TABLE1:Listofcompaniesandtheplatformsthatparticipatedinthe
Estoniantrials[27].
the radio network in the Very High Frequency (VHF) band in
securemode(SECOM-V).ThisC2systemisdesignedforlow- Company/Consortium Platform CountryofOrigin
ranking units (Battalion and below) in vehicular use, with an ARXLandsysteme GEREONRCS Germany
charismaTecOG ARTUSPTAone Austria
applicationthatfacilitatesthesharingofgeographicalposition
CzechUniversityof TAROSV4 CzechRepublic
in the field via portable terminals connected to a secure radio Defence/VOPCZ,s.p.
network [22]. DiehlDefence Ziesel Germany
HentschelSystem MoSeSUGV Germany
The BMS fulfils the requirements of the NATO, guaran-
iMUGS THeMIS4.5+ Multinational
teeing interoperability with the means of communication of iMUGSautonomykit consortium
the alliance’s member countries through the Standardization LEMS.R.L RANGER-POLARIS Italy
Agreement (STANAG) 5527 standard - Friendly Force Track- 570
MilremRobotics THeMIS4.5+ Estonia
ing [23].
MIFIK
Nexter-KNDS ULTRO600 France
RheinmetallCanada MissionMasterSP Canada
F. Army Tactical Radios
StarDefenceLogistics& SR-0001UGV4x4 Spain
This subsection presents two tactical radios used by the Engineering
Portuguese Army, the P/PRC-525 and the TR5000.
1) P/PRC-525: TheP/PRC-525TacticalRadioresultsfrom
TheTHeMISUGVusesanIPradioat2.4GHz.Itemploys
a partnership between EID and Rohde & Schwarz. It operates
MIMOtechnologyinameshnetworkwith4Wofpower.This
on High Frequency (HF), VHF, and UHF and follows the
configuration allows a control range of up to 1.5 kilometres
Software Defined Radio (SDR) philosophy [22].
in line of sight [29].
2) TR5000: In August 2019, to meet the Army’s needs,
TR5000 radios were purchased from Rohde & Schwarz’s
SOVERON family, in the vehicular and manpack versions,
TR5000V and TR5000H [24].
G. Related Work
Thearticle“UnmannedSystemsInteroperabilityinMilitary
Maritime Operations: MAVLink to STANAG 4586 Bridge”
presentsalinkbetweentheMAVLinkcommunicationprotocol
and STANAG 4586 — which defines the architectures, proto-
Fig.1:THeMISUGV[29].
cols,dataelements,andinterfacesbetweenthevariouscontrol
systems of an unmanned aerial system. To realise this link,
converter software was developed on the UAV. This article
The Gereon RCS UGV of ARX Landsysteme in terms of
aimed to enable UAVs that communicate with MAVLink,
remote control and communication [28]:
which is cheaper, to communicate with a GCS that uses
STANAG 4586. The proposed system was developed using • Mobile communication (5G backwards compatible);
the Python programming language and a Raspberry Pi [25]. • Wi-Fi;
TheexperimentsbytheNATOIST-149-RTGgroupdemon- • Radio frequencies of 698 — 960 MHz, 1710 — 2700
strateinteroperabilitybetweenUGVandC2systems.Thegoal MHz, 3200 — 3800 MHz, 2.4 — 2.5 GHz and 5 — 6
was to test interoperability standards in real-world scenarios, GHz.
STO-MP-IST-209 1760 - 3