Integration of a Commercial
Unmanned Vehicle into the Army Communications System
thetechnologicaladvances,inthe1990s,militaryinterestwas D. RadiocommunicationtechnologiesappliedtoCommercial
flagged with the end of the Cold War. However, optimism UGVs
about robotics continued to grow in the new millennium, with This subsection covers the leading radio communication
interest in equipping the AF with smaller, cheaper, and more technologies in UxVs: Wi-Fi, Cellular Networks, and Tactical
resistant UGVs. Counter-insurgency operations in Iraq and Radios.
Afghanistan boosted the use of UGVs, mainly to deal with 1) Wi-Fi: The IEEE 802.11 standard for a Wireless Local
improvised explosive devices [7]. Area Network (WLAN), known commercially as Wi-Fi, has
The ongoing war in Ukraine has had a profound impact become essential daily [13]. Wi-Fi most commonly uses the
on the development of UGVs in Russia. Both sides are 2.4 GHz Ultra High Frequency (UHF) and 5.8 GHz Super
increasinglydeployingUAVsandUGVsforvarioustaskssuch High Frequency (SHF) radio bands.
as combat, logistics, and medical evacuation. This conflict Using Wi-Fi to command and control UxVs offers several
has underscored the importance of UGVs in reducing soldier advantages that enhance operational efficiency and flexibil-
casualties in hazardous situations [8]. ity. One primary benefit is the ability to establish a robust
and high-bandwidth communication link, which supports the
A. Civilian UGV applications transmission of large amounts ofdata, such as high-resolution
video and complex telemetry, in real-time. This capability
The civilian applications of UGVs are wide. They can in-
is advantageous in applications requiring detailed situational
cludepowerlinetesting,surveillancesystems,minedetection,
awareness and precise control [14].
data collection, agriculture, ocean exploration, and scientific
2) Cellular Network: Cellular networks consist of several
exploration in space as the main [9]. In much the same way
base stations, each dedicated to the wireless transmission and
astheyareusedinthemilitary,UGVscanalsobeusedbythe
reception of data in one or more “cells”. In this context, a
police for surveillance and intervention operations in hostile
cell represents a specific region of the total geographical area
scenarios [10].
served by the network. In most deployments, one base station
UGVs offer advantages over human operators, as they can
covers three cells using a strategic antenna configuration and
be used more often and consistently, potentially providing
efficient frequency planning [15].
substantial cost savings. Autonomous systems can also be
The specific way in which the RF bands are used in mobile
operated without safety measures or the equipment needed by
telecommunications is called the wireless standard - the name
humans [5].
given to each generation of mobile telecommunications -
which have replaced each other over the last 30 years: 1G,
B. Military UGV applications 2G, 3G, 4G, and 5G. Each generation comprises a different
In the military context, UGVs are operated remotely, us- family of wireless protocols [16].
ing wireless communication systems such as Radiofrequency 3) Proprietarycommunicationhardware: Thereareseveral
(RF), which enable real-time video transmission. Advanced examplesofproprietarycommunicationprotocolsforcommu-
image processing techniques are used for automatic target nicatingwithaUxV;thissubsectionpresentssomeofthemost
detection. commonly used hardware.
The dismounted mission support system requirements were The SiK Telemetry Radio is an open-source, small, and
firstoutlinedwithintheframeworkoftheUniiedStatesArmy’s lightweight radio platform for establishing telemetry connec-
Future Combat System (FCS) program, which took place tions between autopilots and ground stations [17].
between 2003 and 2009. The support tasks should generally The HM30 Full HD Transmission System by SIYI Tech-
cover [11]: nology sends video to the operator [18].
The Herelink system by CubePilot is an advanced remote
• Combat support: involving reconnaissance, surveillance,
control and video transmission system designed for UxVs.
target acquisition, and fire support;
It integrates a remote controller with a built-in screen on a
• Engineering support: involving mine detection, clearing
customised Android operating system. This system supports
paths, destroying obstacles, building light bridges, and
popular ground control software like QGroundControl and
fortifying terrain;
Solex [19].
• Logistical support: transporting ammunition, collective
4) MAVLink: MAVLink is a middleware protocol that is
weapons, water, food, and medical evacuation.
a universal language for autonomous systems. The main
function of this protocol is to ensure that UxVs can easily
C. Video compression and transmission
talk to each other and Ground Control Station (GCS) by
When piloting an UGV, video transmission becomes an sharing important data like their positions. Almost everyone
aspect of utmost importance. The main problem with this in the autonomous systems world uses MAVLink, even big
transmissiontypeisthehighbandwidthdemand,whichmakes companiesthatdonotalwaysuseopen-source[20].MAVLink
video compression very important. This action aims to make messages are formatted in binary code with a compact 8-
videocontentavailableatalowbitsratewhilepreservingsat- byte header, which makes them highly efficient. Built-in error
isfactoryimagequality,inthiscase,forpilotingtheUGV.This control mechanisms ensure data integrity [21].
technique works by identifying and eliminating redundancies The big deal with MAVLink is that it creates one common
[12]. way to communicate with UxVs, ground stations, and acces-
STO-MP-IST-209 1760 - 2