Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision
for Rapid Counter-Drone System Testing and Deployment
radio frequency (RF), audio, Light Detection and Ranging (LiDAR) data [5]: “Foundational benchmarks
such as FL-Drones, NPS-Drones, and USC Drone provided core RGB datasets for aerial detection and
tracking. Beyond the visual domain, DroneRF captures electromagnetic signatures for RF-based UAV
classification, while DroneAudio and Acoustic-UAV focus on acoustic features. More recent efforts extend
coverage to multi-modal data: Halmstad Drone fuses RGB, IR, and audio, and MMAUD integrates radar and
LiDAR. Community-driven competitions (e.g., the 2nd and 3rd Anti-UAV Workshops and the 4th Anti-
UAV Challenge) feature adversarial or cluttered scenarios that reflect real world operational complexity,
while UAVSwarm and mDrone emphasize large-scale swarm coordination or low-visibility tracking—both
highlighting the need for robust multi-sensor fusion.”
However, public datasets often suffer from several issues. One, the current state of benchmarking, while
foundational, is characterized by critical deficiencies, particularly concerning annotation standards. Without
discrediting the hard work and innovative approaches of their originators, many of these datasets are
developed and maintained on a voluntary basis by researchers and graduate students, data quality can vary
significantly. Moreover, many such large datasets were created with the use of popular foundational CV
models such as YOLO, creating a feedback loop of poor open-source training data, leading to suboptimal
models, leading to substandard labelling which finds its way back into poor open-source training data.
Although no firm statistics are available on the prevalence of these data inconsistencies, Koksal et al noted in
2020 at the 1st Anti-UAV Workshop and Challenge [9] that “such approaches might result in erroneous
annotations”, and found in some experiments that such “annotation errors degrades the performance
[severely]..., especially for missing boxes”, proposing to correct the benchmark challenge’s annotations
where they found mistakes. The mislabelling that occurs often erodes trust in the dataset and contributes to
varying levels of measurement error when models are tested on them. See Figure 2.
Figure 2. Examples of mislabelled data in public UAV-related benchmarks. Top left: label applied
where there is no UAV in the image, Anti-UAV300 dataset. Top right: label applied to a part of the
image in which the UAV is not (actual UAV is on the left of the bounding box), Anti-UAV300
dataset. Bottom two: UAVs present but unlabelled within image, DUT Anti-UAV Detection and
Tracking dataset. Inconsistencies discovered by Resaro Research, 7 Jul 2025.
Two, public datasets may not accurately reflect real-world operational environments, leading to a
dataset bias where models perform well on the benchmark but poorly in deployed scenarios. For instance,
STO-MP-IST-210 1A.03 - 7