Assuring Trustworthy Computer Vision For Rapid Counter-Drone
System Testing And Deployment
Stanimir Arnaudov, Peter A. Chua, Thomas Mühlenstädt, Hanwool Park
Resaro
Törringstraße 22, 81675 München
GERMANY
peter.chua@resaro.ai, thomas.muehlenstaedt@resaro.ai, hanwool.park@resaro.ai
ABSTRACT
Computer vision (CV) is increasingly deployed across NATO militaries for critical defense tasks like
drone detection and classification, drone tracking, and terminal guidance. This continues to revolutionize
military operations on the battlefield, offering a new way to keep up with overwhelming adversary
capabilities in low-cost drones employed en masse, amidst the complexities of modern urban warfare,
declining manpower, and an overwhelming influx of imagery sources. Recent advancements in CV
including more performant models with larger training datasets, and increased edge computing capacity
on sensor platforms, have lowered the barrier to entry for automation. However, ethical considerations,
legal responsibilities, and the critical human element in targeting decisions remain paramount. This
creates a new bottleneck: humans’ ability to vet and further investigate model outputs, necessitating
highly precise and accurate models that can support military operators without overwhelming them with
information.
Ensuring the reliability of CV models through robust Testing, Evaluation, Verification, and Validation
(TEVV) is paramount for effective deployment. However, the limited generalization of classical CNNs
across diverse real-world conditions hinders scalability. Current TEVV methods, including public
benchmarks, often lack relevance for specific counter-drone applications and imagery, while bespoke
testing is resource-intensive. Bridging the gap between governance, operational, and technical
requirements is crucial for scaling CV in defense. Therefore, ensuring CV models scale for defense and
security users requires designing routine structures and processes that would bridge the gap between
governance, operational, and technical requirements.
To address these issues, we propose an assurance framework tailored for mission-oriented, high-risk
drone defense CV systems for electro-optical and infra-red imagery. This framework lays out the criteria
to create robust internal reference datasets and quantify their properties, including an approach to qualify
hard-to-detect targets, and introduces comprehensive pre-deployment testing checklists for CV models.
Some examples of actual implementation will be shown, as well as how highly contextualized, use-case
specific internal benchmarks can be developed to compare models in a standardized manner. Overall, this
framework aims to simplify and scale automated testing, identifying weak performance spots, and
providing decision-makers with clear go/no-go criteria for deploying CV models, ultimately bridging the
testing gap and fostering trust in these critical technologies. It will also enhance interoperability through
providing a common frame of reference across like-minded defense agencies evaluating performance on
perception software used in counter-drone solutions, and facilitating information-sharing.
1.0 INTRODUCTION
Computer Vision (CV) is a field of study relating to how computers can understand and analyze information
from the environment using visual data such as images and videos, across a wide range of imaging
techniques and platforms including electro-optical, thermal, and radar sensors. Over the past decade, CV has
STO-MP-IST-210 1A.03 - 1