Commercial UAVs Multispectral Detection
2.5 Acoustic detection
As much as optical detection, the acoustic one can be done similarly using human senses – ears, and with the
aid of technical acoustic devices.
Acoustic detection by human senses. The series of UAV detection experiments using human ears in the
real environment were performed in the same place, time and conditions like the Human optical detection
was done (see above).
The structure of these experiments was a little simplified: The UAVs were flying away from the evaluators
who did knew the time and the direction of the flight. In a real situation, the direction of the flight would
probably be the reverse one and acoustic observer will not exactly know the flight azimuth and altitude.
Acoustic detection using technical devices. This set of experiments was performed in a real environment.
The TAROT F650 quadcopter and the DJI S800E hexacopter were the representatives of the mini UAV
category. The UAV noise was recorded by microphones. These data were post-processed and evaluated
according to the noise level of the background.
The experiment condition was as follows:
• climate zone and place: temperate; Czech Republic;
• weather and temperature: sunny, 5 °C;
• wind speed: 4 ms-1;
• humidity: 70%;
• background noise level: 55 dB (measured by SONY F-V120 device);
• UAV distance from the sensor post: 8 m;
• UAV flight altitude: 5 m AGL;
• flight method:
o stabilized altitude hold (constant motor RPM);
o manoeuvre (variable motor RPM).
Noise data were acquired by the SONY F-V120 microphone and post-processed in MATLAB r2011a.
During post processing, data were transformed from time to frequency domain.
3.0 RESULTS
The main aim of the previous experiments, related study and then this paper was to verify, clarify, and
summarize the real-time detection of commercial drones. Real-time UAV detection is essential for possible
counter-action or elimination. Human senses without technical devices are the least effective method of
detection. However, in a terminal phase of UAV flight, human senses are usually the main means for
weapon aiming and drone elimination.
The first detection sentinel line is usually executed by X-band radars, which can provide early warnings. The
effectivity of this kind of system significantly depends on the skills and training of radar operators’ crew.
However, the availability and usage of radar are limited, and radars are used mostly by military or air traffic
control organizations. At present, several studies about those methods have been published, and the research
is in progress [33], [34], [35], [36].
The average RCS of the evaluated UAVs was in the range from 0.05 to 0.2 m2 (in certain directions, the
value of the RCS peak was 0.5 - 0.75 m2). Measured values correlate with values from similar experimental
measures [37].
Fig 14 represents the illustrational example of RCS directional diagram.
12 - 8 STO-MP-MSG-SET-183