Commercial UAVs Multispectral Detection
used. In the case of a lack of time or during a high-density attack, effector use can also be decided
autonomously, but lethal elimination (weapons) should be controlled only by a human operator (for ethical
and safety reasons) to avoid friendly fire or collateral damage.
Research on the C-UAV domain is now focused on active defence against the UAV. There are works on
lethal or nonlethal elimination by AD C-UAVs [19], [44], but this research is still in progress. This topic has
been discussed and researched intensively [45], [46], [47], [48]. These reflect recent UAV incidents
(attacks). The final step of this research will consist of result fusion (detection and elimination) and
implementation into real systems.
5.0 CONCLUSIONS
This paper covers several years of research and supports the design concept of future defence and protection
systems against UAS threats. Together with the development of radar for LSS targets, there is a great
potential for the development of robust and reliable systems that are able to detect and eliminate UAV
threats. The key attribute of the suggested system is its modularity. Potential users (military, air traffic
control, security services, etc.) can adjust the system to their needs. However, many conceptual and technical
aspects of the C-UAV systems still need to be concerned. Of course, a general solution that reflects all
possible situations does not exist - hence the phrase, “there is no silver bullet.”
Hypothesis, confirmed by this study defines a detection area of up to 2000 m and a terminal area of up to 300
m around a guarded location. These are key areas for sensor network installation and for the use of counter
UAS equipment - effectors.
The last phase of the work will consist of an analysis of current detection methods of small-sized targets,
from mini or micro UAS categories, across the entire alert system. This last step concludes the logical link
among the three basic pillars of air defence—sensors, assessment systems (command and control systems),
and effectors (lethal or nonlethal engagement against UAS).
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
The work presented in this article was supported by the Czech Republic Ministry of Defence—the
University of Defence Brno development program “Research of sensor and control systems to achieve
battlefield information superiority,” DZRO FVT ELEKTRO.
We thank members of the Department of Weapons and Ammunition and the Department of Communication
Technologies, Electronic Warfare and Radiolocation, University of Defence, for the special equipment
provided and the technical support. We would also like to express our gratitude to Mr. Pavel Šedivý (Retia
Inc.) for cooperating during the research and experiments.
12 - 12 STO-MP-MSG-SET-183