Commercial UAVs Multispectral Detection
Figure 17:Overview of the results of the performed experiments.
4.0 DISCUSSION AND FUTURE DIRECTIONS
The results of the study show that X-band radars are usually able to detect LSS targets (micro and mini
UAV) reliably at distances about 3000 m. However, detection is mostly in the form of radar scans or plots
and not radar tracks. Based on these results, we recommend focusing on multispectral detection with a
combination of radar, IR, visual, acoustic, radio, etc. Initial detection (scan, plot) is executed by X-band
radar (or a radio receiver), and more precise detection at closer distances is achieved by other methods. Once
initial detection and localization of the UAV is achieved, further action can be taken (lethal or non-lethal
elimination).
Authors performed several experiments with standard radars (not specialized to detect small RCS objects),
however we do not have mandate to publish them in this paper. Radar, that is not primarily designated to
detect small RCS objects, could be used just as the early warning or alarm device. This early warning may be
triggered through the scan or several scans or short track on the radar scope before the track disappear due to
the radar threshold parameters. Authors admit that it would not be effective to implement radars, which are
not designed to detect small RCSs, to multi-sensor fields. Authors also think that producers should work on
innovations to cope with such disadvantage. There are some radars now, for example C-RAM radar Arthur,
which would be suitable for UAV detection when innovated.
Experiments in the IR, visual, and acoustic domains achieved approximately equal detection limits. All of
these domains (IR, visual, and acoustic) are appropriate for terminal UAV detection at closer distances (up to
300 m). However, this distance is usually not sufficient for the non-autonomous reaction procedures (a UAV
with a flight speed of about 10–15 ms-1 can pass this distance within 20–30 s). For this reason, we
recommend a C-UAV approach and the implementation of autonomous defence systems with a maximum
reaction time up to 20 s [42], [43].
For the crucial objects, complex defence a combination of various types of sensors and the corresponding
real-time data exchange with a command and control system (C2) or with a surveillance control system is
necessary in non-military applications. Such a system autonomously fuses the data from multiple sensors and
evaluates possible threats. The operator (the person in the loop concept) chooses which effectors should be
STO-MP-MSG-SET-183 12 - 11