A Novel Swarm Defense End-to-End System
for Autonomous Drone Detection, Tracking, and Neutralization
1) Monitoring and Detection: After arming and take-off, the system effectively classified
environmental noise as non-threatening, keeping the drone idle.
2) Intrusion and Identification: As with the simulations, the system identified and classified drones as
they entered the buffer zone.
3) System Engagement: In this phase, our system behaved similarly as during the simulated
experimentations with the only difference that real-world perturbations (noise) were identified as
neutral entities (e.g., birds) to allow our AI agent to take them into account for collision avoidance.
4) Capture Progression: In real-world operations, deploying the net was a virtual action conducted only
in simulation. The success (or not) of the capture was therefore assessed in the simulated
environment mirroring the actual situation. Upon capture, the behavior of the captured red drone was
no longer mirrored in the real world. The simulated captured red drone was dragged by the
simulated blue drone that captured it into the retrieval area. The real red drone however simply put
itself out of the game by lowering its altitude below the buffer zone and remained ignored by the
system until the end of the scenario. The real capturing blue drone moved towards the retrieval area,
mimicking the fact of dragging the captured red drone and releasing it in that area. Its simulated
counter-part was mirroring this behavior.
These adaptations in the system allowed us to successfully test various scenarios, encompassing the
detection, localization, classification, tracking, neutralization and safe retrieval of captured targets in matches
of two defending drones against two intruders.
6.0 CONTRIBUTION TO ADVANCEMENT OF SECURITY MEASURES
Our research design successfully exhibits the ability to tackle escalating drone threats, as demonstrated by
our theoretical and practical executions. Notably, our system is designed to address an equal number of
threats to the defensive swarm drones. Although, we must emphasize that this system is, for the moment,
validated for small swarms only. This was substantiated during our simulated experiments and real-flight
trials, where five drones managed to track an equivalent number of enemy drones in simulations, achieving a
secure interception of all infiltrating units. In real-flight operations, our small defensive swarm of two drones
coped with two enemy drones, confirming our system’s adaptability and scalability under different
conditions and its promising application to real-world scenarios for future versions. To be noted also that our
system is agnostic of the hardware equipment it is using. The drone make and model, the sensors type or the
neutralization payload type can all be easily replaced or changed by different ones.
7.0 CONCLUSION
Our designed system showcased the integration of ground and air segments, entailing a range of sensors and
countermeasure capabilities. By employing ground radar and PTZ camera, the system enabled long-range
detection, classification, and localization of potential threats. Simultaneously the air segment contained a
fleet of autonomous counter-UAVs, each equipped with an Electro-Optic sensor and a net deployment
mechanism for neutralization purposes.
By synchronizing sensor data, facilitating communication among resources, and utilizing artificial
intelligence, the counter-UAV system provided an end-to-end solution from detection to neutralization of
intrusive drones. Priority was given to maintaining human oversight via a manned ground control station,
thereby keeping the human operator in the loop for monitoring and a stop mechanism in case it was
necessary for safety reasons. The stop mechanism consists of a “stop all” button that interrupts the
commands during a mission from the AI agent to the drones. The stop button freezes the movement of all
drones, defending or intruding, and gives back the control to the human pilots to manage the situation.
10 STO-MP-SET-315-26