A Novel Swarm Defense End-to-End System
for Autonomous Drone Detection, Tracking, and Neutralization
targets, and (iv) tracking and neutralization of the invading drones, combining ground and embedded
sensors. During a mission, the airspace is divided into specific zones. First, a delimited protected area where
any unauthorized drone activity is strictly forbidden. Secondly, a buffer area where any intrusion triggers a
reaction from our system, allowing for a coordinated response before reaching the protected area.
Our research contributes to the advancement of security measures against the escalating drone threats by
providing a comprehensive, adaptable and scalable solution enabling collaborative autonomy thanks to
relevant technologies and procedures. By combining our new components and existing system, we aim to
mitigate risks and safeguard restricted areas against unauthorized drone activities. Developed in
collaboration with subject matter experts, the research contributes to the advancement of counter-UAV
technologies within the NATO S&T community.
1.0 INTRODUCTION
Driven by rapid technological advancements and widespread accessibility, drones now represent a
significant security concern, especially in restricted zones. The need to counter unauthorized drone
operations is more prominent than ever. In this paper, we present an innovative end-to-end system that
employs a defensive swarm of autonomous unmanned aerial vehicles (UAV) to effectively neutralize a
swarm of invading drones. The main sectors affected by drone incidents between December 2018 and March
2020 were airports, private property, law enforcement, first responders and prisons [1].
1.1 Background on Drone Usage and Security Challenges
Several academic and technical efforts have been directed towards the creation of C-UAV systems. In a
recent work [2], 537 C-UAV products have been identified. From such, only 138 encompasses detection and
interdiction processes. From this number, only 3 of them have the capability of using a net as neutralization
means combined with detection capabilities. Nevertheless, the detection is carried out by ground systems
(e.g., radar) and not by a combination of ground and sky systems, such as we propose in our solution for an
effective localization and tracking of intruders. In addition, there is not a product in this review that uses
swarming as neutralization means as part of an end-to-end system from detection up to neutralization. Last,
the inclusion of AI algorithms for real-world applications is very recent and seldom deployed.
There is a growing number of incidents by drone misuse [1]. Countering manually or with a single
interdiction mean is not effective. Operating multiple drones to increase the chances of successful
neutralization can potentially overwhelm operators. It is important to note that managing multiple drones to
counter a single intruding drone is not a trivial task, not to mention the financial implications of training
multiple operators and the operational costs themselves. Countering a swarm of drones is an even more
complex operation, specifically due to drone coordination challenges.
1.2 Objective of the Research and the BlueSwarm System
This research aims at designing, developing, implementing and evaluating an innovative C-UAV system
called BlueSwarm that can handle detection, tracking and neutralization of intruding swarms, leveraging a
fleet of collaborative autonomous drones, for real world applications. Primarily, the system is devised to
detect potential threats within a specified “buffer zone”, before they reach a “protected zone”. The system
uniquely identifies and localizes the detected threats. Any tracked entity classified as intruder triggers a
response from the defensive swarm for tracking purposes. If an intruder is detected and assigned for tracking
by one or more agents of the swarm, an autonomous sensing control is initiated. The system then transitions
to the neutralization phase when the defensive swarm’s positioning aligns with the neutralization criteria, and
hence, proceeds to safe neutralization.
2 STO-MP-SET-315-26