A Novel Swarm Defense End-to-End System
for Autonomous Drone Detection, Tracking, and Neutralization
2.2.5 Neutralization
The culmination of each mission is the neutralization of the intruding drones. Once a defending drone is
tracking a target, it can volunteer for neutralization, based on criteria consideringfactors like proximity to the
target, the position of other entities in the defensive swarm and net availability. That drone then deploys its
net-based payload to scoop the intruding drone when it is approved to engage its target. While for the
investigations of this paper, the engagement of a drone with a target is automatic, it is designed to be
triggered by a human operator.
Figure 5: Net deployment and target capture in simulation. On the left, the drone engages in
neutralization with the target and deploys its net after meeting the ready-to-neutralization
conditions. On the right, target drone is captured. On both images, we observe how the drone to
the right supportsthe visual tracking from a safe distance.
While the net system was proven successful in real flight operations, for our experiments we deploy the net
only in simulated environments. A real net has not been useddue to associated operational costs. During real
world experimentations, telemetry data was fed into the simulator to virtually capturethe drones.
3.0 USE CASES DEFINITION
Adaptability and versatility are core attributes of our system, allowing it to handle different scenarios and
behaviors of drone intrusions efficiently. With inputsof subject matter experts, we defined several use cases
representing typical intruding drone behaviors to test our system. Recent literature reports drone usage
rangingfrom hobbyist [4], [5], delivery [6],photography [3]up to militaryand terroristapplications [7], [8].
We therefore derived four different drone operator’s behavior models matching those applications, as
illustrated on Figure 6:
1) Clueless operator: this use case represents typically hobbyists testing their drone, unaware of the
nearby presence of restricted zones theycouldinadvertently fly over. The resulting drone behavior is
rather erratic with lots of variation in velocity, heading and altitude.
2) Careless operator: in this use case, drone operators willingly ignore a known restricted airspace to
leverage the shortest possible route e.g. forbusinesspurposes such as deliveries.The resulting drone
behavior is rather constant in velocity, heading and altitude.
STO-MP-SET-315-26 7