MADE FOR ADVANCING OCEAN HEALTH AND POLICY SOLUTIONS.
The Duke University Marine Lab focuses on solving the problems facing not only marine
environments but also the people and communities who depend on them. Its scholars are some of
the most respected experts in their fields, and are sought by local, tribal and federal governments
as well as the United Nations for impartial scientific advice on the climate crisis, global ocean
governance, fisheries management, coastal resilience, and marine species conservation.
The Nicholas School and the Duke Marine Lab TRANSFORMING TEACHING & LEARNING
exemplify interdisciplinary scholarship, The Undergraduate Research Scholars
spanning more than 40 disciplines across Program gives Duke undergraduate students
16 focus areas. Leveraging its research hands-on, immersive research experiences. The
strengths in oceans, energy transformation, program offers guidance from a faculty mentor,
climate science, forestry, and planetary, funding for travel and conferences, and
environmental and human health, the school professional development workshops,
uses interdisciplinary collaborations and culminating in an honors thesis for graduation
advanced technology to enhance with distinction. At the graduate level, many
understanding of complex environmental gifted students defer their professional
changes and their impacts. The Nicholas School education because of financial constraints. Our
and the Duke Marine Lab also translate these Nicholas Scholars Program will fully support
scientific advances into innovative and scalable the most promising applicants to the Coastal
environmental solutions. and Marine Systems concentration of the
Master’s of Environmental Management (MEM)
EMPOWERING THE BOLDEST THINKING
professional degree program.
We consistently strive to strengthen our
expertise in marine ecology, conservation, and STRENGTHENING CAMPUS COMMUNITY
governance by offering named endowed The Marine Lab supports research, teaching and
professorships to support new faculty visitors from around the world throughout the
positions and attract and retain the brightest year, but due to constant activity and the harsh
and most innovative academic scholars. We coastal environment, our older facilities need
also plan to launch the Rachel Carson upgrades. Renovating buildings and
Postdoctoral Scholars program to support early modernizing areas of the Lab would allow the
career researchers. The program will recruit Nicholas School to continue its mission of
postdoctoral scholars to work with Duke education, research, and serving communities
Marine Lab faculty for a two-year term, with a both locally and globally.
focus on young scientists from first-generation
backgrounds.
madeforthis.duke.edu