STANAG 4586 –Standard Interfaces of UAV Control System (UCS) for
NATO UAV Interoperability
Mário Monteiro Marques
Escola Naval - Afeite
2810 – 001 Almada
PORTUGAL
mario.monteiro.marques@marinha.pt
ABSTRACT
Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (UAV) are changing the way military and civil operations are carried out. New
types of vehicles, from different providers, each with its own specifications and characteristic, are
continuously being developed. This diversity leads to an increased level of difficulty in terms of
interoperability. The objective of STANAG 4586 is to specify the interfaces that shall be implemented in
order to achieve the required Level of Interoperability (LOI) between different UAV systems, so as to meet
the requirements of the concept of operations (CONOPS) defined by NATO countries. STANAG 4586
establishes a functional architecture for Unmanned Aerial Vehicle Control Systems (UCS) with the following
elements and interfaces: Air Vehicle (AV), Vehicle Specific Module (VSM), Data Link Interface (DLI), Core
UCS (CUCS), Command and Control Interface (CCI), Human Computer Interface (HCI), and Command
and Control Interface Specific Module (CCISM). Besides STANAG 4586, there are already a number of
existing or emerging Standardization Agreements (STANAGs) that are applicable to UAV´s. They provide
standards for interoperable data link (STANAG 7085), digital sensor data between the payload and the UAV
element of the data link (STANAG 7023, 4545, 4607, and 4609), and for on-board recording device(s)
(STANAG 7024 and 4575). Although not providing a complete solution for interoperability, STANAG 4586
is certainly a crucial step taken in that direction, providing a roadmap for future developments.
1.0 INTRODUCTION
During the last years, Unmanned Aircraft Vehicles (UAV) became a niche in continuous expansion within
the aerospace market. With an investment that may exceed billions of dollars by 2015, it is predictable that
the next generation will possess even more capabilities than today’s [1].
The UAV´s are changing the way military and civil operations are carried out. This technology is gaining
increasing awareness and promises to bring a higher level of efficiency to tasks such as data and image
acquisition of areas of interest, localization and tracking of specific targets (target detection, classification
and identification), map building, communication relays, pipeline surveying, border patrolling, military
operations, policing duties, persistent wide area surveillance, search and rescue, and traffic surveillance.
Therefore, the use of such systems provides a credible alternative to manned aircraft. They operate in
conditions more dangerous with more autonomy and can be very cost-effective when compared to manned
aircraft.
A North Atlantic Treaty Organisation (NATO) Interoperability Design Study was conducted in the early
1990s to investigate ways to enable interoperability of electronic systems. One of the approaches considered
was to mandate that all nations procure and operate the same systems. However, it was emphasised at this
time that NATO could not mandate interoperability of national reconnaissance systems, but that
interoperability among national systems would be purely voluntary. It was not considered a good idea to
have one contractor monopolise the reconnaissance systems in NATO. Instead, a comparison was drawn
between communications between reconnaissance systems and computer-to-computer communications. By
STO-EN-SCI-271 3 - 1