STANAG 4586–Standard Interfaces of UCS for NATO UAV Interoperability
2.2.2 Data Link Interface (DLI)
The DLI, between the CUCS and the VSM element, enables the CUCS to generate and understand specific
messages for control and status of air vehicles and payload [4]. DLI specifies the mechanism to process and
display specific messages, which are air vehicle and payload independent.
2.2.3 Core UCS (CUCS)
The CUCS should provide a user interface that enables the operator to conduct all phases of an UAV
mission, and support all requirements from the DLI, CCI and HCI [4]. The computer generated graphic user
interface should also enable the operator to control different types of UAVs and payloads.
Depending on the desired level of interoperability in the respective UAV system, the CUCS should [4]:
• Receive, process and disseminate payload data from the AV and its payload;
• Perform mission planning;
• Monitor and control the AV, payloads, and data links;
• Support additional future AV and payload capabilities;
• Provide the UAV operator the necessary tools for computer related communications, mission
tasking, mission planning, mission execution;
• Be able to host VSM and CCISM functions.
2.2.4 Command and Control Interface (CCI)
CCI defines the standard message set and accompanying protocols that have been selected to be C4I
System/node independent, avoiding placing additional requirements on the C4I System [4].
The CCI is intended to cover all types of messages and data that need to be exchanged in both directions
between the CUCS and the C4I systems during all the phases of a UAV mission, including [4]:
• Before the flight: tasking messages, tactical situation, environmental data, general mission
constraints and mission plans;
• During the flight: status and service messages, payload data, progress reports;
• After the flight: status and service messages, payload data, post-flight exploitation reports, mission
reports.
The networks and communications used to support the CCI interface should be NATO C3 Technical
Architecture (NC3TA) compliant, which is a framework that provides interoperability among military
command, control and communications systems, maximizing the exploitation of commercial off-the-shelf
(COTS), and reducing proliferation of non-standard systems [4].
2.2.5 Human Computer Interface (HCI)
The STANAG specifies the requirements levied upon the CUCS, and does not impose any design
requirements on human factors (HF) and ergonomics, (e.g., number of displays, manual controls, switches
etc.)[4].
The HCI establishes the operator display and input requirements that the CUCS shall support. Although not
specifically defining the format of the data to be displayed, there are some identified requirements that the
CUCS shall provide in order to ensure an effective operation of the UAV system [4], such as display and
operator interactions imposed on the CUCS by the CCI and DLI [4].
STO-EN-SCI-271 3 - 7