49 Overview of military drones used by the UK armed forces
8. Autonomous versus autonomy
Summary
There is a global campaign to pre-emptively ban fully autonomous weapon systems. The UN
Special Rapporteur has recommended a moratoria on the testing, production and deployment
of Lethal Autonomous Robots. The UK Government says it has unilaterally put in place a policy
to not develop lethal autonomous robots but does not intend to formalise that in a national
moratorium. Fully autonomous weapons systems do not yet exist.
One of the major concerns with future plans for remotely piloted
aircraft systems is the move towards ever greater autonomy.
Autonomy and autonomous should not be conflated. As the Defence
Committee noted:
The concepts of automation and autonomy are often applied to
unmanned aircraft interchangeably, but, as the MoD has noted,
the distinction is important “as there are moral, ethical and legal
implications regarding the use of autonomous unmanned
aircraft”.220
The issues surrounding fully autonomous weapons systems are detailed
enough to merit a separate briefing note. However the subject is
relevant to a discussion about RPAS because technology is proceeding
at such a pace that such an autonomous weapons system may be
developed. Debates have been held in Parliament and there is a global
campaign for a pre-emptive ban on fully autonomous weapons.
Terminology used to describe this includes: lethal autonomous weapons
systems (LAWS), lethal autonomous robotics (LARs) and, more
colloquially, “killer robots”.
Fully autonomous weapons systems
Fully autonomous weapons systems are not yet in existence and the UK Fully autonomous
Government says it has no plans to develop such a system. weapons systems are
not yet in existence.
However a debate about the repercussions of such a technology and
how States should respond is underway.
A significant contribution to this debate was the report by the UN
Special Rapporteur on extrajudicial, summary or arbitrary executions,
Professor Christof Heyns, to the UN Human Rights Council on lethal
autonomous robotics (LAR) in April 2013.
Professor Heyns defined lethal autonomous robotics as “weapon
systems that, once activated, can select and engage targets without
further human intervention.”
Professor Heyns said LARs raise far-reaching concerns about the
protection of life during war and peace. He questioned the extent to
which they can be programmed to comply with the requirements of
220 Defence Committee, Remote Control: Remotely Piloted Air Systems – current and
future use, 25 March 2014, HC 772 2013-14, para 21