45 Overview of military drones used by the UK armed forces
event. It’s not detached. It’s not a video game. And it’s certainly
not 8,000 miles away.201
The Defence Committee spoke to Reaper operators at RAF Waddington
and as a result rejected suggestions of a video game mentality:
It was very clear from the visit to XIII Squadron and discussions
with Reaper aircrew that all were experienced professional
personnel with a clear purpose and keen understanding of the
Rules of Engagement which govern their operations. Despite
being remote from the battle space they exhibited a strong sense
of connection to the life and death decisions they are sometimes
required to take. This was in stark contrast to the image portrayed
by some commentators of “drone” pilots as video gaming
“warrior geeks”.202
Lord Stirrup, former Chief of the Air Staff (and former Chief of the
Defence Staff) suggests an RPA operator will make better decisions than
the pilot in an aircraft at 20,000 feet “because he is looking at a bigger
screen, with greater definition, he will be able to see more detail of the
target area, and he will be in a better position to avoid collateral
damage.”203
The US-based Stimson Centre’s task force on US drone policy similarly
rejected suggestions that RPAS creates a ‘playstation mentality’ among
operators. Ironically, it says, the men and women who remotely operate
lethal UAVs have a far more up close and personal”view of the
damage they inflict than the pilots of manned aircraft, who speed past
their targets in seconds from far above.204
7.3 Impact on mental health of operators
Does the nature of operating an RPA put operators at risk of mental
health issues?
Unlike combat aircraft pilots, RPAS operators may witness the full
aftermath of an air strike by continuing to observe the target area. They
may watch in real-time an attack on fellow service personnel. This
experience may be harder to process because of the physical separation
between themselves and the area of operations. Because they are not
deployed as a unit to a combat area, they may not benefit from the
social cohesiveness and support networks gained from units that deploy
on operations together.205
RPAS crew may experience difficulty in separating work from home. The
NATO study says “the impact of fighting a war on-base and going
home to family at night obliterates the clear demarcation between
201 “Demand grows for UAV pilots, sensor operators”, Air Force Times, 21 April 2012;
see also “Meet the pilots who fly America’s drones”, Global Post, 16 December
2011
202 Defence Committee, Remote Control: Remotely Piloted Air Systems – current and
future use, 25 March 2014, HC 772 2013-14, para 57
203 HL Deb 5 February 2014 cGC89
204 Stimson Centre, “Recommendations and Report of the Stimson Task Force on US
Drone Policy”, 30 June 2014, p24
205 Major A Haider, “Remotely Piloted Aircraft Systemsin Contested Environments: A
Vulnerability Analysis”, NATO Joint Air Power Competence Centre, September 2014