Number 06493, 8 October 2015 34
protect human life and to investigate all deaths (civilians and
combatants alike) arguably caused in breach of that obligation.137
The Defence Committee noted this in its report. The Government’s
response to the Committee explained the “well-established command,
control, supervisory, training and qualification frameworks the RAF has
in place for conducting air operations.” The Ministry said Reaper crew
receive regular training on domestic and international law regarding the
use of force, which includes the understanding of, and compliance with,
UK Rules of Engagement and International Humanitarian Law. Reaper
crew have access to legal advice and support during operations 24
hours a day, 365 days of the year. The Government went on to say:
The UK complies fully with its obligations under international law,
including as set out in Article 36 of Additional Protocol 1 to the
Geneva Conventions, to review all new weapons, means and
methods of warfare. This process applies equally to manned and
unmanned systems. UK forces operate in accordance with
International Humanitarian Law, following the principles of
humanity, proportionality, military necessity and ensuring that
only appropriate military targets are selected. The UK's clearly
defined Rules of Engagement are formulated on this basis. The
same strict Rules of Engagement that govern the use of
conventional military aircraft also apply to RPAS and targets are
always positively identified as legitimate military objectives.
UK Reaper aircrew carry out a high level of consistent training and
have continuous access to legal representation. As a result, the
public can be confident that they always strictly adhere to these
Rules of Engagement.138
There is a significant legal debate about the United States policy on
using its armed RPAS fleet for counter-terrorism operations.139 The UN
Special Rapporteur on Human Rights, Ben Emmerson, released a report
in March 2014 examining the use of remotely piloted aircraft
extraterritorial lethal counter-terrorism operations. He raised a number
of legal questions and urged all States to ensure that the use of
remotely piloted aircraft complies with international humanitarian law
and international humanitarian rights law. 140
The UN Human Rights Council subsequently adopted a resolution in
April 2014 calling on states to ensure that “any measures employed to
counter terrorism, including the use of remotely piloted aircraft or
armed drones, comply with their obligations under international law,
including the Charter of the United Nations, international human rights
law and international humanitarian law, in particular the principles of
precaution, distinction and proportionality.” The UK voted against the
resolution.141
137 “The legality of the UK’s use of Armed Unmanned Aerial Vehicles (drones)”, Public
Interest Lawyers, 8 June 2013
138 Defence Committee, Remote Control: Remotely Piloted Air Systems – current and
future use: Government response, 22 July 2014, HC 611 2013-14, para 67
139 For more about US policy on targeted killings, see Council on Foreign Relations
backgrounder, 23 May 2013; “Legal Issues Related to the Lethal Targeting of U.S.
Citizens Suspected of Terrorist Activities” Congressional Research Service
memorandum, 4 May 2012
140 UN Human Rights Council, A/HRC/25/59, 11 March 2014, para 73
141 UN Human Rights Council A/HRC/RES/25/22, 15 April 2014