Number 06493, 8 October 2015 42
military, the does not inadvertently collude in RPA or other counter-
terrorist actions contrary to international law.
safeguarding arrangements are a form of mitigation, and may
provide useful evidence of a state’s intent. Failure to confirm that
such safeguarding arrangements exist undermines the assurances
of government and could make it harder, if issues arise, to defend
the UK’s actions.189
The chair of the Commission, the chair and vice-chairs of the APPG on
Drones and the Director General of RUSI190 have written to the Foreign
Secretary requesting he “consider disclosing the Guidance to
Intelligence Officers and Service Personnel applicable to the passing of
intelligence relating to individuals who are at risk of targeted lethal
strikes outside traditional battlefields.” The letter went on:
In our view, disclosure of the Guidance, setting out the principles
which govern intelligence sharing consistent with UK domestic
and international law, in the context of the US covert drone
programme, would serve to safeguard the important work of UK
intelligence officers pursuing their statutory functions. Disclosure
would reassure an anxious public that the UK government will
protect personnel from inadvertent collusion in counter-terrorism
operations contrary to our understanding of the law. It would also
underline the distinction between Reaper strikes by our Armed
Forces in Afghanistan, and now Iraq, and those of other states
elsewhere.191
6.9 An international code of conduct
governing RPAS usage?
Lord Judd tabled a question for short debate in the House of Lords to
ask the Government: “what progress they have made in preparing a
code of conduct for the civilian and military use of drones operating
from the United Kingdom; and what negotiations they advocate for an
international code.” Lord Tunnicliffe spoke in favour of codes for the
use of drones and the use of lethal force.192 Earl Atlee responded for the
Government: “RPAS are aircraft under human control. The very clear
regulations and guidance that apply to aircraft also apply to RPAS. I am
confident that no further code of conduct is required.193
189 Birmingham Policy Commission, The security impact of drones: challenges and
opportunities for the UK, October 2014, p50-51
190 Tom Watson MP, David Davis MP, Baroness Stern, Professor Sir David Ormand and
Professor Michael Clarke.
191 Letter to the Foreign Secretary, 19 November 2014, available on APPG on drones
website
192 HL Deb 25 June 2013 c722
193 HL Deb 25 June 2013 c728