REAPER 7.0: What’s New
5. Using the Add button in the container window we can now insert the required FX into the container’s FX
chain – for this example ReaEQ, ReaDelay, ReaVerbate and a second instance of ReaEQ. Your FX window
should now resemble that shown (above).
6. The pin connectors for the first two container FX will both need to be set to receive input from and send
output to container channels 1 and 2 only, as shown here (below left).
7. Similarly, the pin connectors for other two FX will both need to be set to receive input from and send
output to container channels 3 and 4 only (below right).
8. Finally, you can experiment with adjusting the various FX parameters – and save this file as a model that
you might find useful for future use.
Note: A new container can be added to an existing FX chain by choosing Add FX container from the FX menu.
You can also create a new container from this menu by selecting any FX or selection of FX in the chain and
choosing Move to container from the FX menu.
Example 2
In this example we will split an audio stream into two chains – left and right – and apply separate FX to each
stream before returning the signal to the FX chain, one FX to channel 1 (left) only and the other to channel 2
(right) only. A possible application for this technique could
be on a vocal, using one EQ instance to add body, the
other to add clarity.
In this case, the pin connector numbers should be left at
its default settings – two container channels, two inputs,
two outputs.
The pin connector settings for each of the two EQ
instances could then not be simpler. The first takes its
input from and sends its output to channel 1 only (as
shown here).
The second takes its input from, and sends its output to,
channel 2 only.
More Complex Applications
FX containers are handy, but even they do have their limitations!
More complex models can be created using REAPER’s pin connectors – for example, fine tuning your parallel
processing requirements, or directing the output from some FX to a different track. For these and other related
topics refer to to the JS: Channel Mapper-Downmixer in the REAPER User Guide.
Tip 1: FX containers can be even more powerful when combined creatively with other REAPER features. For
example, you can have two or more containers running in parallel with each other!
Tip 2: You can select any FX or number of FX in a track or item’s FX chain, then choose Move FX to container
from their right-click context menu to move those FX into a new container.
Page 19