REAPER 7.0: What’s New
Mouse Modifiers for Power Users
Below are summarised REAPER’s default mouse modifiers and a sample of the many actions. Chapter 15 of the
User Guide includes information about how these can be customized.
Mouse Modifiers
Fixed lane comp area – Left drag
Default action Move comp area.
Shift Move comp area ignoring snap.
Ctrl Copy comp area and media item together.
Shift Ctrl Copy comp area and media item together ignoring snap.
Alt Move comp area and media items.
Shift Alt Move comp area and media items ignoring snap.
Shift Ctrl Alt Move comp area and adjacent comp area edges ignoring snap.
Fixed lane comp area – Left click
Default action Move comp area to lane under mouse.
Shift Comping, Copy edited media items to new lane and re-comp.
Alt Delete comp area including media item.
Shift Alt Heal comp area with previous adjacent comp area in same lane
Ctrl Alt Delete comp area but not media item.
Shift Ctrl Alt Extend comp area to next comp area or end of media.
Fixed lane comp area – Double click
Shift Set loop points to comp area.
Ctrl Extend comp area to next comp area or end of media.
Fixed lane header button – Left click
Default action Play only this lane.
Ctrl Toggle playing this lane.
Alt Play only this lane while mouse button is pressed.
Fixed lane header button – Double click
Default action Comp into lane.
Shift Select items in lane.
Ctrl Toggle playing this lane.
Shift Ctrl Insert lane.
Alt Delete lane (including media items).
Fixed lane comp area checkboxes: The two checkboxes to avoid empty track space when clicking source
lane and when mouse editing a comp area can be enabled to limit comp area edits to within media item edges.
Assignable Actions
The actions list includes numerous fixed lane comp area actions which can be assigned to keyboard shortcuts, or
toolbar buttons, or as mouse modifiers. Here is a brief summary of categories. For more detailed descriptions of
options, see the Actions List (Actions, Show actions list).
Add comp area for lane under mouse Move comp area
Move comp area up/down Razor edit: create comp area
Set loop points Copy comp lane items
(inc with half or one second Move items down to next available lane
preroll/postroll Delete lanes
Split comp area Turn comping on/off
Split media items Explode takes on selected tracks to fixed lanes
Preferences and Options
REAPER’s Appearance, Track Control
Panel preferences settings include an
option to specify default behavior when
clicking on the fixed lane collapse button. This can be set to toggle between showing one or many lanes, and
displaying big lanes or small lanes.
In Project, Track/Send Defaults there is an option to make fixed item lanes the default for new tracks.
Page 14